Climate Change. Rising temperatures, melting glaciers, extreme weather      events, changing habitats and seasons: an overwhelming number of natural      signals indicate that climate change is well underway. Governments and      industries are now developing plans and technologies for a lower carbon,      more energy efficient future. But to succeed, we need to dovetail our      efforts to realize productive results and economies of scale. The time      has absolutely come to see, discuss, and act upon what we now most      certainly know—that visible changes in our environment are transforming      the way we must approach the business, personal, and economic decisions      we make in our lives today.
Now is the time to thoughtfully examine these complex issues as well as      adaptation strategies that decrease exposure to the risks posed by      climate change. Multiple factors are now in play, making this the most      exciting time in history to be at the table when the issues of climate      change are discussed. From California's multi-billion dollar corporations      to smaller community governments and stakeholder groups--everyone has an      important role as part of the solution. What is less certain is how we      band together, how we decide to move forward in harmony with the policies      and legislation put forth by a new administration.
California has always been at the forefront of environmental leadership,      from its elected officials to its everyday residents. Since its creation      in 1975, CAPCOA and its members (leaders of all 35 local and regional air      districts in California) have focused on ensuring this trend continues,      with enthusiastic drive and dedication toward cleaning the air and      ensuring the residents of California have a healthy environment in which      to live and thrive, both today and in future generations.
Along with its co-hosts, CAPCOA is proud to have presented The CAPCOA      Climate Change Forum  on August 30-31, 2010 at the Marriott      Marquis Hotel in San Francisco, California. This event marks one      more step toward achieving a cleaner, greener, and more energy efficient      tomorrow and advancing the critical discussions about climate change.
Mat Ehrhardt, CAPCOA President
Presentations will soon be available on this site for viewing and downloading.
Highlighted Speakers!
Arianna Huffington , Co-Founder & Editor in Chief, The Huffington Post
Jared Blumenfeld , Administrator, United States Environmental Protection Agency, Region IX
Mary Nichols , Chairman, California Air Resources Board
Hunter Lovins , President and Founder, Natural Capitalism Solutions
James Boyd , Commissioner, California Energy Commission
Anthony Eggert , Commissioner, California Energy Commission
Steve Heminger , Executive Director, Metropolitan Transportation Commission
Mark Jacobson , Professor, Stanford University
Wade Crowfoot , Political Director, West Coast, Environmental Defense Fund
Joel Makower , Chairman and Executive Editor, GreenBiz.com
Alec Loorz , Founder, Kids vs. Global Warming
Larry Allen , Air Pollution Control Officer, San Luis Obispo Air Pollution Control District
Jack Broadbent , Executive Officer/Air Pollution Control Officer, Bay Area Air Quality Management District
Barbara Lee , Chair, California Air Pollution Control Officers Association’s Climate Protection Committee
James Goldstene , Executive Officer, California Air Resources Board
Larry Greene , Executive Director/Air Pollution Control Officer, Sacramento Air Quality Management District
Event Partners
