Black Carbon Reduction  Program
The  Climate Institute is working to increase global awareness of the warming  influence of gases and aerosols with short atmospheric lifetimes, including  black carbon, methane, and tropospheric ozone.  Specifically, the Climate  Institute seeks to highlight the opportunity to limit near-term climate change  by aggressively targeting short-lived gases and aerosols.  As part of this  effort, the Climate Institute is analyzing various technologies and policies  that can effectively reduce short-lived warming agents in different parts of  the world.  Information is disseminated through stakeholder meetings,  publications, editorials, briefings, and the Tickell Interactive Network.  Through these efforts, the Climate Institute  hopes to make individuals at all levels more knowledgeable about the important contribution  to global warming due to  short-lived gases and aerosols, and about the methods available to reduce   emissions of these species in order to reduce the increasing  pace of near-term climate change.
Comparing Atmospheric Pollutants
To most effectively limit  near- and long-term climate change, national and international climate  mitigation strategies must target the full range of greenhouse gases and  warming particles. Carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) emissions during the 21st  century are projected to be responsible for roughly half of the warming  influence from greenhouse gas emissions during the 21st century.  Therefore, mitigation efforts solely focused on CO 2  will be  inadequate to reverse or even substantially slow the global warming trend  within this century. Because unabated warming over this century will likely send  the Earth’s climate past several impact thresholds, it is thus vital to also be  controlling emissions of the non-CO 2  greenhouse gases, and particularly those  with short lifetimes. Because of the multi-century lifetime of CO 2 ,  however, its mitigation also remains absolutely critical to slowing climate  change and averting worst case climate scenarios.
To complement the CO 2  effort that will limit long-term warming, emissions of species with shorter  atmospheric lifetimes than CO 2  must be reduced to suppress near-term  warming. Short-lived warming agents are responsible for most of the warming  caused by non-CO 2  emissions. Substantially reducing these emissions  will lower their atmospheric concentrations over periods of months to decades and  will relatively rapidly limit the warming influences that are causing the  ongoing rising of the global average temperature. The rate of relief that can  be achieved varies between species. The methane perturbation caused by  emissions lasts on average for roughly a decade. Black carbon (often referred  to as soot) and tropospheric ozone (formed in the atmosphere from carbon  monoxide, nitrous oxides and volatile organic compounds) persist in the  atmosphere for only a few weeks. Black carbon reductions will also curb the  soot deposits on snow and ice that greatly increase rates of melting. Targeting  black carbon is also a public health measure; breathing in the particulate matter  is known to cause several million deaths each year from indoor and outdoor  exposure.
© 2007 - 2010
Phone: +1-202-552-4723
