Monday, October 20 2:23 pm EST
The museum has been a cornerstone of natural history research and public education since it first opened its doors in 1871.   Most people who've grown up in the NY metropolitan area have spent many happy hours there learning and being amazed and tourists come from all over the world.  
AMNH has a brand-new exhibit on climate change.   I went to the press opening last week, toured the exhibit then and have been back once since, and have surfed
a bit.   In museum parlance, this is a blockbuster show.
The museum's president, Ellen Futter, described the exhibit as an attempt to demystify the subject.   It also offers, in her words, a "mosaic of solutions" to global warming.   Michael Novacek, Provost of Science, said the science on climate change has become much more clear and compelling.   In the exhibit hall, I spoke with Edmond Mathez, co-curator of the exhibit.   I asked him if there wasn't rather more information than could be digested in the exhibit.   He said there was indeed a lot of information on display, but that he expected people to come more than once.   He told me you couldn't properly just put up the "headlines" but that the exhibit has layers of information into which people can delve.   It has both a textual and graphic density that will appeal to the student of environmental and energy issues.  
I also talked to
.   He has been, throughout his career, both a top-level scientist and an activist.   He long ago realized the importance of having environmental science understood by the public and policy makers and having the serious message of environmental protection embraced by them.   He is co-curating the exhibit.   You can listen to an informative interview with Michael
talking about the exhibit from NPR, and you can see him here in a 15-minute interview with Charlie Rose talking about the IPCC report.
Get to the AMNH for this exhibit if you can, and take in some of the extensive public programming as well.  It is running through August 16.
Wednesday, October 15 1:18 pm EST
Electric Cars  - There’s more good coverage on the promising trend to ZEV surface transportation.  See Any colour as long as it is green * from the “FT” yesterday.  Mitsubishi is getting out in front of GM and Renault-Nissan on electric cars.  The car is small but it’s got range and it’s ten times cheaper to run than a gasoline-powered car.  See also the website here for the “i MiEV” - Mitsubishi innovative Electric Vehicle.
*If the allusion escapes you, it’s a paraphrase of Henry Ford’s famous quote about his Model T:  “Any customer can have a car painted any colour that he wants so long as it is black.”
IT  - The computer folks know that computers are energy hogs as are the vast array of server farms and all the other very high tech that supports the industry.  They’re on a mission to get things much more efficient, saving power, money and GHG emissions.  (I mentioned this here a while back.)  McKinsey has come out with a new report further identifying the incredible bang for the buck in creating efficiencies in the communications and information technology sphere.  See this article .  (Registration is required, but it’s free, quick and easy.)
There’s an excellent resource too in “ GreenerComputing ” which ” focuses on the environmental concerns of information technology professionals, covering such topics as energy efficiency, hazardous materials reduction, and disposal and end-of-life issues.”
Jobs, Baby, Jobs  - In Colorado, Governor Bill Ritter says that his administration’s renewable energy initiatives have created 90,000 green jobs.  See this from the “Rocky Mountain News.”  Ritter was addressing the state’s “ New Energy Economy ” conference.  See also the Governor’s Energy Office .
Species Loss  - The bad news is that the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) has issued its “Red List” for 2008 and there are many species endangered and threatened.  That there are environmental threats to thousands of species is not news, certainly, but global warming is exacerbating the problem.  This in itself is also not news, unfortunately, but the IUCN is documenting the dangers.  In this article from ENN, we note:  “Thirty-five percent of the world’s birds, 52 percent of amphibians and 71 percent of warm-water reef-building corals are likely to be particularly susceptible to climate change”
See also this article from “Time” - How Climate Change Will Impact Animals .  This article quotes the president of Conservation International , Russell Mittermeier:  “Global warming is something that all conservationists are worried about.”  You can also get audio of an interview with Mittermeier.
Bali   Action Plan  - For the wonks amongst us, you can find a new report from UNDP, “The Bali Action Plan:  Key Issues In The Climate Negotiations - Summary For Policy Makers” here .
Sunday, October 12 11:10 am EST
These are some juicy items I've been saving up.   They probably should be savored by you and me more fully, "But at my back, I always hear, time's winged chariot hurrying near."
Bad News on Emissions  , Here's a depressing but not overly surprising story from the AP:   Global warming pollution increases 3 percent .   One positive outcome of the world recession into which we're heading , or into which we've already headed , may be the slowing down of our GHG emissions.   It's certainly not how we want this to happen.   Let's just hope that we can keep moving forward, if more slowly economically, and continue to transition to a low or zero-carbon world.
Nukes &  Renewables ‚
from the "Palm Beach Post" says that the Florida PSC staff has recommended against including nuclear power in the state's portfolio of renewables.   This has national implications.
Coal Plants Diminished Role?  , Here's an eyecatcher from "USA Today" that also has national implications:   Utilities shrink the role of coal on global-warming worries .   I wrote about some of the hits that old King Coal's been taking at Coal Takes Some Lumps back in February.   These are new, very interesting developments being reported.
The Physical Science Basis  , Here's an
I went to an interesting confabulation yesterday up at the Earth Institute.   Jeffrey Sachs, director of the
, kicked around the relative merits of the financial architecture of the Kyoto Protocol.   In a nutshell, Sachs thought the way we've been doing business in terms of creating a carbon market based on the regulatory regime of the Kyoto Protocol is insufficient to meet the Herculean task of confronting global warming.   He said that a carbon tax would be much more effective.   Mr. de Boer maintained that building out the regulatory scheme in an agreement that will, hopefully, be finalized in Copenhagen next year, will enable further gains than those we've already realized from the Kyoto financial mechanisms.   The discussion got worldwide press.   See
for one example.)
One of the points that de Boer made regarding the usefulness of the cap-and-trade system is that it generates interest.   It certainly has caught the interest of the financial industry.   A market-based approach was also endorsed in Bali, de Boer reminded the audience.   He also made it clear that the market mechanisms are not the only ones.   He did see a role for taxes, subsidies etc.   For a distillation of the UNFCCC's views on this, see Carbon market, international offset mechanisms critical in meeting climate change challenge from their latest newsletter.
Sachs articulated a number of faults with the present system.   The existence of two types of participants in the Kyoto Protocol , those subject to regulation and those developing countries who are not , is a big flaw.   In a word, the US won't sign the Copenhagen agreement if China and India, not to mention South Africa and Brazil, among others, aren't required to make firm GHG-reduction commitments.   The
in the US Senate is all the proof anyone needs of that.   Another problem is the amount of money available from an international regime.   It won't be enough, Sachs said.   He also cited the incredible complexity of the regulatory scheme in this.   It would be much simpler to tax the "upstream" sources of the GHGs:   the coal mines and pits or the oil and gas wells.
One of the more salient points made was by one of the commentators, Columbia engineering professor Klaus Lackner, albeit unintentionally.   He is deeply invested in developing CCS technology.   He said that we can choose between CCS and phasing out fossil fuels.   Unfortunately, neither Lackner, nor any of the principals in yesterday's discussion, nor most other policy makers for that matter, consider the latter a real option.   Witness for instance the emphasis on CCS in Dingell and Boucher's discussion draft (see the last post below).   From my vantage point, we are wasting precious time and money on CCS and, for that matter, nuclear power.   (See
with a major proponent of nukes from the last time I attended an Earth Institute event.)   We have the resources to more than meet the transition to a zero-carbon society and we ought to get on with it.
Another thread from yesterday was that taxes are politically unpalatable.   Sachs said Americans are "neurotic" about taxes.   I would say that's a kind way of putting it.   Another commentator, Henry Derwent, head of the International Emissions Trading Association (IETA), recounted how he'd been briefing a top British official recently and ticked off a number of the very positive aspects of a carbon tax but that the worthy high panjandrum said he'd never be reelected if he supported such a thing.   (Actually, there has been a fair degree of good discussion in the UK on this.   See "Oh, to be in England " )
What I don't think does get mentioned in these sorts of high-level policy discussions , on most subjects, in my experience , is the pervasive influence of special interests.   In short, King Coal , the oil and gas majors, and most utilities don't want a carbon tax.   The cap-and-trade approach gives them not only time and space, but the opportunity to get free allowances, and an ample ability to make money on selling allowances.   The financial industry has many reasons as well to support the market-based approach.   A carbon tax would bring us much faster and surer to a zero-carbon world than these folks might find to their advantage.
Finally, while I'm up on my horse, I have to say that although Sachs and the others talked about the primary importance of carbon financing and technology policy, little was said about lifestyle changes.   The IPCC chairman, Rajendra Pachauri, has begged us to eat less meat.   We can make enormous progress with an ever-greater awareness of energy conservation and mass transit, recycling and teleconferencing.   We can look at low-tech alternatives in
Columbia University do for their events.
By the way, you can see the webcast of this event
.   Check out the many extraordinary programs of the Earth Institute and, if you're around New York City, get on their events list.  And for more on the Carbon Tax, go to the Carbon Tax Center .  They’ve got an impressive line-up of economists endorsing their program.
Wednesday, October 8 2:09 pm EST
It’s not as catchy as “Drill, Baby, Drill” but it’s actually where we’re going in the developed world.  There have been a number of important developments recently entirely worthy of note.  (See observations I’ve made previously in this area under Carbon Markets  .)
Energy and Commerce  - The US House of Representatives’ Energy and Commerce Committee has issued a discussion draft to its members and the public on climate change legislation.  See this  from Bloomberg News and this  from Gristmill.
As I noted here  in July, this powerful committee seems the likely bet as the principal venue in which cap-and-trade legislation is going to be substantially shaped.  The Senate and the new President will, of course, have their say.  The next President, as you know, be he either of the two candidates, will be considerably more favorable to a substantive climate change package than the present occupant of 1600 Pennsylvania Ave.  The new President will also very possibly go to the table in Copenhagen in December of 2009 armed with a new US law.  This will be a critical element in getting nations emitting even more dangerous amounts of GHG than the US and Europe, namely China and India, to come under an international regulatory umbrella.
Rich Boucher, chairman of the subcommittee on Energy and Air Quality, and John Dingell, chairman of the full committee, have issued a memo  to their members describing the discussion draft.  (For all the relevant Energy and Commerce documents, including the excellent series of white papers they’ve issued, you can go here  .)
Let me note what I regard as some salient points from the memo.  It says, for instance:  “Politically, scientifically, legally, and morally, the question has been settled:  regulation of greenhouse gases in the United States is coming.”  There is a repeated emphasis on the importance of energy efficiency and clean energy technology.  There is also a considerable emphasis on the development and deployment of carbon capture and sequestration (CCS) technology.  This appears integral to the program that the draft legislation will create.  Boucher and Dingell note that they “expect to quickly pass the bipartisan “Carbon Capture and Storage Early Deployment Act’” in the next Congress.  The memo also calls for “strict oversight of the carbon market to ensure its efficient operation without market manipulation.”  The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission would be the designated executive agency for this oversight.  (Enhanced regulation of financial markets will be, I daresay, a recurring theme in the next Congress.)  Another noteworthy point is that the draft makes international reforestation and afforestation projects eligible for offsets.  This is going to be a key element in the Copenhagen treaty.
The memo further notes that some of the groundwork for this initiative has already been done with the passage of the energy bill  in December of 2007.  I would note that the energy provisions  of the recent “Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008″ also move us further down the road to a comprehensive federal climate change policy.
Europe  - I mentioned in my previous post that the EU Environment Committee was gearing up for some critical votes.  Well, they came through a little better than might have been expected yesterday.  See Europe backs carbon capture with €10bn in today’s “FT.”  The money to finance CCS   projects will come from the auction of permits in an expanded European Trading Scheme (ETS).  In this release from the European Parliament, some of the details of the proposed expanded ETS are laid out.  This release talks about the CCS   plan.  It says “The Environment Committee wants all larger power stations built from 2015 onwards to be equipped with the new carbon capture and storage technology (  CCS  ) ”
I’ve noted my skepticism about CCS   a number of times, the last time here .  I am entirely willing, however, to be proven wrong.  Certainly, the most promising approach in this regard is the gasification of coal and then using the gas for combustion.  Gas can be much more easily “cleaned” of the carbon dioxide and other pollutants.  Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle (IGCC) could prove the way forward.  See this  from GE, for example, this  from Siemens or this  from DOE.
In any event, the deepening of GHG-emission reductions in Europe and the institution of a federal regulatory regime in the US will certainly drive these technological innovations.
RGGI  - Ten Northeastern and Mid-Atlantic states have decided not to wait for a federal law.  The Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative  has a more modest framework, certainly, than the federal scheme that is coming or the ETS.  Nevertheless, it will require a cap on carbon dioxide emissions from power plants.  See this  from the NY State Department of Environmental Conservation (my old employer) for a look at how the program will be managed.  The RGGI has just had its first auction of allowances and realized $38,575,783 for the six states participating this time around.  The press release  quotes NYSDEC Commissioner Pete Grannis:  “The first RGGI auction has successfully used market forces to set a price on carbon, and this will send a clear market signal to support the investment in clean energy technologies.”  There was a better-than-expected demand for the allowances according to this article  from the “FT.”  For more on the RGGI, go to their website and this recent “NY Times” article  .
Not to be outdone, the Western Climate Initiative  , a compact of seven Western states and four Canadian provinces, is well along in creating its own robust regulatory regime.
There doesn’t appear to be any turning back from cap-and-trade.  “ Tis a consummation devoutly to be wished I might add.
Monday, October 6 2:53 pm EST
All the positive things I’ve described here at the blog regarding business practices, technological breakthroughs, and political developments are very much in train.  They signal, in my mind, real hope for the future.  I don’t, however, want to live with rose-colored glasses obscuring my vision.
We’re heading into a tempest now.  The world economic crisis that threatens to swamp hundreds of millions of people is going to slow down progress on confronting climate change.  The eloquent and insightful “Charlemagne,” writing in “The Economist,” notes the difficulties that Europe has had in meeting its ambitious renewable energy and GHG reduction goals.  In my fourth post, from over a year and half ago, I wrote about the EU Summit Agreement .  I wrote that “The European Union Summit meeting produced a truly historic agreement on greenhouse gas reduction, renewable energy, and energy efficiency, among other things.”  Well, the times were good and the Europeans were energized.  There was a Homeric flavor to the Summit’s pronouncements, particularly in the light of the daunting specter of global warming.  In A changed climate , Charlemagne notes “The heroic mood is gone now. In March 2007 Angela Merkel, the German chancellor and chairman of the summit, was a green champion. Today she sounds like a lobbyist for German business, listing the industries that must be shielded from the full costs of her package. In truth, almost every country has found reasons why the climate-change promises may be impossible to meet in their current form.  Britain is gloomy about its renewable-energy targets.”
There will be critical votes tomorrow in the EU’s Environment Committee.  They will show the depth of the commitment in Europe to realizing the EU’s goals  .  See Brussels readies for “Super Tuesday’ climate vote from the “EurActiv” news service.  “But the vote comes amidst a worsening economic crisis, with several member states indicating that they want to put the brakes on any rapid adoption of the measures.”
I believe, though, that one of the most powerful mechanisms for stabilizing world economies and providing jobs, is staring us right in the face.  Scores of analysts , and American Presidential candidates , talk about clean coal technology, nuclear power, more fossil fuel extraction, and more pipelines.  Charlemagne recommends, among other things, “planning more terminals for liquefied natural gas imports, supporting pipeline projects that bypass Russia “  But the opportunity to go beyond fossil fuels and nukes is right there for us.  It will be economically empowering , as report after report has said.  (See my last post below, among many others here.)
Yes, the world economic waters are storm-tossed.  We have to focus on the critically important task of stabilizing banks and other financial institutions.  That, not incidentally, is a task for all the world’s economies, working together, as so manifestly didn’t happen in the 1930s.  But we should also use this time as an opportunity  to reconfigure our infrastructure, indeed our way of living, to create the conditions for long-term sustainability , and always remember that means economically and environmentally.
Update  , Apparently my thinking is entirely in tune with that of Lord Stern of Brentford, world-class economist and lead author of the Stern Review on the economics of climate change .  See Now is the time to tackle global warming from ”The Guardian” today in which he says “We’re going to have to grow out of this … and this is an area which looks as though it could well grow strongly and with the right support could be one of the major engines of growth.”  Lord Stern is the chair of the just-opened Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment at the London School of Economics.
Friday, October 3 4:10 pm EST
Unless you’ve been away on a several-month long vacation in another solar system, you know all about the incredible turmoil we’ve been experiencing in the world stock and money markets and in the “real economy.”  Now that the “Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008,” with the “Troubled Asset Relief Program” at its core, has been passed by the House and the Senate, with a very swift signing by the President and passage into law, we may - or may not - see some settling down.  (See this  from the AP.)
In any event, as I noted in the last post, one of the facets of the new legislation is the extension of billions of dollars worth of tax credits for the solar, wind and other renewable industries and the creation of some new mechanisms such as support for plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEV).  These provisions are contained in Division B of the new law, the “Energy Improvement And Extension Act Of 2008.”  (See pp. 113 to 261 here  , but for an infinitely more succinct summary, see this from the Senate Finance Committee, pp. 1-7.)
As you might imagine, the renewables folks are over the moon.  See this release  from the Solar Energy Industries Association.  “By passing this bill, Congress has finally given the solar energy industry “policy certainty’ that will attract investment, expand manufacturing and lower the cost of solar energy to consumers,” said Roger Efird, SEIA chairman.  The American Wind Energy Association said here  “These tax credits are essential to the continued growth of wind energy, to the economic and energy security of the United States, and to a successful beginning in the fight against global warming.”
The jobs issue, in this extraordinary economic downturn , okay recession , is a critical one.  I’ve noted that at this blog any number of times, including under “Green Jobs” from my post here  last month.  WorldWatch Institute has a special report here  on the global prospects for jobs from renewables, energy efficiency and other clean tech fields, and the US Conference of Mayors have just put out their report  on “Current and Potential Green Jobs in the US Economy.”
These tax credits will go a long way to providing a further boost for these key industries for economic growth and environmental health.  We may yet get this damn thing right!
Wednesday, October 1 11:34 am EST
I will never tell you that I can predict what Congress is going to do.   Based on everything I've been reading for several weeks from every economist in sight who's been asked, I thought the vast majority of the members of the House of Representatives would've figured it out.   And sometimes you just do the right thing.   Those members who voted against the measure to relieve the very dangerous stresses on banks and the economy, perhaps because they thought the $700 billion price tag was too high, should have known that the markets would react poorly to the legislation failing.   How could they not know?!   Final score?   Monday's loss in market value for S&P 500 stocks came to about $930 billion.   You do the math.   (See also Congress decides it is worth risking depression from world-class economist Martin Wolf in today's "FT.")
In any event, after these Know-Nothings, Democratic and Republican, heard from their constituents who had lost thousands on Monday, and perhaps were sobered at the very real prospect of a depression staring us in the face, they came to the table.   What's this got to do with climate change?   I've flogged the question of tax credits for renewables to you here time and again, and I had last written that these appeared to be headed into oblivion in this Congress.   Well, not so fast:   The Senate is going to include these in the package it's going to vote on today.   See
from the "LA Times"
The whole package, with the $700 billion rescue , or TARP (troubled asset relief program), or bailout, whatever you want to call it , will pass and will go to the House tomorrow.   That all the tax credits, billions beyond the renewables portion, will not be fully "paid for" does not seem to concern the Senate, as evidenced by their previous passage of legislation.   (See my post below from September 24.)  
One of the chief proponents of "pay as you go" accounting , an excellent principle for the most part, don't get me wrong about that , is Steny Hoyer, the powerful Majority Leader of the House.   Given the direness of the banking situation, he will undoubtedly go along with the Senate bill's unpaid-for tax credits, and hope to make it up in the next Congress and with the next Presidential administration.   He realizes, as many more of his 228 colleagues who voted no on Monday do now, that we're staring into the abyss.  
Monday, September 29 11:00 am EST
I've mentioned the question of the renewable energy tax credits any number of times at this blog, most recently on September 21 and 24 below.   Well, the House, not surprisingly, did not embrace the Senate's bill from September 23.   For one thing, the Senate bill, somewhat out of left field and only to placate Republican Senators and the White House, gives new tax breaks for refineries to develop oil from shale and tar sands or for coal liquefaction.   These aims are entirely counterproductive to either helping the renewable energy industry in this country or to reducing greenhouse gases.   The Senate bill also was an omnibus package that included, among other things, a one-year reprieve for 20 million people from the alternative minimum tax (not in itself a bad thing, certainly).
(H.R. 7060).   It passed on September 26 by a vote of 257 , 166.   This is, not incidentally, a terrific piece of legislation overall with provisions supporting not only renewables but also energy efficiency projects, green building, and the smart grid, not to mention credits for research.   See this story,
With the Senate and House bills differing so, and it being past time for Congress to break for the elections , and with the little matter of the $700 billion financial industry bailout somewhat reducing Congress's ability to focus on extraneous matters , it doesn't look as if the tax credits are going to fly until, at least, the lame duck session between the elections and the inauguration of the new Congress and President.   Given how difficult this has all been, it might not come into being even then.   It is distinctly possible that the next Congress will be taking this up.   What will the disruption in the tax credits mean for the renewables industry?   It won't be good, but it won't be fatal by any stretch of the imagination.   As noted in my last post below, we are already in a renewables revolution.   The only question is how fast will it come , and will it be fast enough to avert catastrophic climate change.
I sat in on some of the exciting sessions of the FPA's annual
(WLF) this week.   If you're interested in the recent developments in the financial industry and the bigger picture of the "geoeconomy," there were two panels of experts discussing some of the ins and outs of those issues which you can view
Spanish President Jose Zapatero gave an address in which he noted a number of critical issues in which Spain is actively engaged.   One of these is climate change.   He noted his country's leading position on renewable energy.   He said that countries which take the lead in developing and deploying new renewable technologies will enjoy huge advantages.    (This echoes what I heard recently from a leading writer, editor and consultant on energy who I was interviewing for an article on the   "smart grid" movement.)   Spain has one of the top wind energy industries in the world.   This good little
See also this BBC clip on how strongly Spain is pushing renewables.
There was a particularly stimulating panel on energy at the WLF that was moderated by John D. Hofmeister, a former President of Shell Oil Company.
The first to speak was Benita Ferrero-Waldner, EU Commissioner for External Relations and Neighborhood Policy.   She cited the
and other research identifying climate change as an extraordinary threat.   She noted that a number of analyses have identified it as a "threat multiplier," so it is a significant security concern as well.    She quoted Robert Schuman, one of the visionaries who fostered the creation of the organizations which grew into the European Union:   "World peace cannot be safeguarded without the making of creative efforts proportionate to the dangers which threaten it."   (See the entirety of the landmark "Schuman Declaration"
.)   Ferrero-Waldner was clearly equating the overall threat of catastrophic climate change with world war.   Unfortunately, for my money, she dwelled a little overmuch on the question of pipelines carrying oil and natural gas coming into Europe and not enough on the potential for regional and international cooperation on renewables.   (See my references
Ashok Gupta is an old hand, having led NRDC's
Phil Sharp is a former Congressman who runs
Last, but not least by a long shot, was Vijay V. Vaitheeswaran, correspondent for "
."   Vaitheeswaran is quite articulate and had a number of salient points to make, among them that there are three pillars of energy instability:   poverty, the environment, and geopolitics.   On the first of these, he cited the fact that much of the developing world is off the grid and relies on wood, coal, dung and other cheap fuels for energy for heat and cooking.   This has a devastating health impact because of the enormous amounts of soot generated.   (See my post, Black Carbon and Solar Cookers .)   On environmental concerns, he noted the problems of climate change and local pollution.   On the matter of geopolitics, he said that because there is so much oil concentrated in so few countries, that this is considerable cause for concern.
On the positive side, Vaitheeswaran and I share the perspective that there are extraordinary developments that are shaping things such that we will see the movement toward clean, reliable distributed energy continue to burgeon.   He identified three "megatrends" that are fostering an energy revolution:   First, he sees "smarter" government involvement.   Governments are market minded, but they are increasingly thoughtful about energy and environmental policy.   Secondly, he says there's a bottom-up revolution being driven by NGOs (like NRDC, Environmental Defense Fund, and many others) in which there is a growing confluence in areas like climate policy and business.   (See, for instance, my review of EDF's Earth: The Sequel and the work of the
All in all, this was a blockbuster panel and discussion on one of the critical issues of the day.   Stay tuned for much more from the FPA in the coming year on
