Wednesday, August 27 9:26 am EST
The  IPCC says “Post-consumer waste is a small contributor to global  greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (<5%) with total emissions of  approximately 1,300 Mt carbon dioxide-eq in 2005. The largest source is  landfill methane ”  Still, that’s a lot of GHG.  (See  the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report Working Group III Report “Mitigation  of Climate Change” - Chapter 10: Waste management .)
With  solid waste management, as with any sector, there are ancillary benefits  to reducing GHG:  increased energy efficiency, fewer  hazardous wastes for disposal, etc., etc.  The AR4-WG3 Glossary defines Co-benefits  as “The  benefits of policies implemented for various reasons at the same time,  acknowledging that most policies designed to address greenhouse gas  mitigation have other, often at least equally important, rationales  (e.g., related to objectives of development, sustainability, and  equity).”
Another  way of looking at this is in having “no regrets” in your climate  mitigation policy.  The IPCC glossary describes it this  way: “ No-regret policy (options/potential) - Such policy would  generate net social benefits whether or not there is climate change  associated with anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases. No-regret  options for GHG emissions reduction refer to options whose benefits  (such as reduced energy costs and reduced emissions of local/regional  pollutants) equal or exceed their costs to society, excluding the  benefits of avoided climate change.”
I  devised a plan a few years back for New York City’s municipal solid  waste.  I articulated my ideas, gleaned from the best  concepts and practices in urban sustainable development, in a  comprehensive proposal for New York City’s modest 25,000 tons a day of  municipal solid waste and called the plan, Urban Gold .  The heart of  the strategy is to co-locate a materials recovery facility (MRF) and other  waste disposal facilities, such as pyrolysis or gasification plants , with  industries that would use the recycled materials as feedstock for their  manufacturing.
Another  way to feed a MRF is to use recovered materials from a landfill.   The idea of “landfill mining” has been kicking around for a  number of years and has found some traction.  See this  article from Reuters - Could US$100 Oil Turn  Dumps Into Plastic Mines?  ( See also this Reuters “factbox” on landfills.  The IPCC’s Waste Management piece cited  above is also full of useful information.)
There are thousands  of opportunities all over the world to mine landfills for plastics and  metals for recycling, and organic materials for use as soil  additives or for conversion by pyrolysis or similar processes to char  and useful gases such as hydrogen.  (See the previous post  below on this.)  The first global conference  on landfill mining will take place in October in London.   Obviously, this movement is building.
All  sorts of “best practices” are coming into greater prominence as a  result of our having to confront the climate change crisis.  One  should have little or no regret at all about this.
Leave Comments Below»
