January 27, 2009
A new study by researchers at Princeton University ’s      Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs has      found that global climate change may lead to the retreat of some      invasive plant species in the western United States, which could      create unprecedented ecological restoration opportunities across      millions of acres throughout America. At the same time, global      warming may enable other invasive plants to spread more widely.
The study, “ Climate change and plant invasions: restoration      opportunities ahead? ”, was co-authored by Bethany Bradley, a      biogeographer, Michael Oppenheimer, a geoscientist, and David      Wilcove, a conservation biologist, at Princeton’s Woodrow Wilson      School, and will soon be published in the journal Global Change Biology .
The researchers assessed the relationship between climate change      and the distribution of five prominent invasive plants in the      western United States – known colloquially as the “kudzus of the      West” – cheatgrass; spotted knapweed; yellow starthistle;      tamarisk; and leafy spurge. Such plants are defined as invasive      because they were brought into this country from other lands and      now dominate and alter ecosystems in ways that threaten native      wildlife, agriculture, and ranching. All have greatly expanded      their ranges in recent decades in the western U.S., causing      millions of dollars in damage to farmlands and rangelands.      Invasive plants are increasingly expensive to control, and it is      widely believed that global warming will make the problem worse.
But Bradley and her co-authors find that global warming may also      reduce the competitiveness of some invasive plants if conditions      become climatically unsuitable to the weeds, “creating      opportunities for restoration in areas currently dominated by      intractable invasive species,” according to the study.
The five species were selected in part because they represent      the most problematic plants in the western U.S. The study      authors created “bioclimatic envelope models,” wherein the      authors identified where the invasive plant species occurred,      and identified critical climate variables such as precipitation      patterns and temperature patterns that are associated with the      presence of the invasive plants under investigation. The authors      then determined what combined set of climate variables best      described the distribution of these weeds, and mapped all of the      places in the U.S. where these climate conditions occur.
Developing such models is important because scientists can use      them to assess how changing climate conditions might affect the      distributions of invasive plants. Maps of how invasion risk is      likely to change with global warming are also important for land      managers designing long-term protocols for fighting invasive      plants.
The researchers employed 10 atmosphere-ocean general circulation      models (AOGCMs) that predict what climatic conditions in the      West are likely to be in 2100 if emissions are not limited, and      matched those predicted conditions to the climate conditions      associated with each of the invasive plant species. The      projected invasive species distributions for each of the models      were added together to create a map of invasion risk under      future climate conditions.
“Just as native species are expected to shift in range and      relative competiveness with climate change,” the authors wrote,      “the same should be expected of invasive species.”
Specifically, the researchers concluded that climate change is      likely to expand invasion risk from yellow starthistle in      California and Nevada – and lands currently occupied by invasive      populations of the weed in California, Oregon and Washington are      unlikely to become unsuitable for the species; hence, they have      low potential for restoration. Tamarisk distribution, they      found, is unlikely to be affected by climate change.
Cheatgrass, however, is likely to be affected by climate change,      potentially moving northwards into parts of Idaho, Montana and      Wyoming, but retreating in southern Nevada and Utah. And,      according to Bradley and her co-authors, the impacts of climate      change will likely shift spotted knapweed, currently distributed      throughout the foothills of the Rocky Mountains and the Colorado      Plateau, to higher elevations, leading to both expanded risk and      restoration opportunities in part of Montana, Wyoming, Utah, and      Colorado.
Leafy spurge, abundant in northern states west of the      Mississippi River and some rangeland west of the Rockies, will      likely retreat from some places in the face of climate change,      creating restoration possibilities in Colorado, Nebraska, Iowa,      and Minnesota – but potentially expanding into parts of Canada      not included in the researchers’ study. In addition, the      researchers found that leafy spurge is likely to retreat from      Nebraska and parts of Oregon and Iowa, creating strong potential      for restoration in these areas.
To better address the impacts of invasive species, the authors      note, further modeling and experimental work is needed to      determine which species will be able to occupy these sites if      the invasive species are reduced or eliminated by climate      change. Local native plants (the ones that were there prior to      the arrival of the invasive species) may be unable to reoccupy      these areas as a result of global warming. If local native      plants cannot reoccupy the areas, then native plants from      elsewhere in the West will need to be considered for restoration      to prevent new invasive species from quickly invading these      sites.
“The restoration opportunities associated with the retreat of      currently intractable invasive species are vast in the western      United States,” the authors wrote. “The uncertainties associated      with these changes, as well as the unknown makeup of viable      future vegetation… highlight a pressing need for integrated      modeling, monitoring, and experimental work to better address      the ecological consequences of climate change.”
“The question for policy makers and land managers is, ‘What do      we want these lands to be?’” said Wilcove. “These lands will      change, and we must decide now – before the window of      opportunity closes - whether we do nothing or whether we      intervene.”
“Governments need to reduce emissions quickly to avoid a variety      of dangerous climate changes, Oppenheimer warned. “At the same      time, it will be necessary to adapt to the inevitability of some      warming. Proper management of ecosystems to minimize the damages      is a key part of any effective adaptation strategy.”
Bradley B.A., Oppenheimer M., Wilcove D.S.,
Global Change Biology, 2009, DOI:      10.1111/j.1365-2486.2008.01824.x
ABSTRACT
Rather than simply       enhancing invasion risk, climate change may also reduce       invasive plant competitiveness if conditions become       climatically unsuitable. Using bioclimatic envelope       modeling, we show that climate change could result in both       range expansion and contraction for five widespread and       dominant invasive plants in the western United States.       Yellow starthistle (Centaurea solstitialis) and tamarisk       (Tamarix spp.) are likely to expand with climate change.       Cheatgrass (Bromus tectorum) and spotted knapweed (Centaurea       biebersteinii) are likely to shift in range, leading to both       expansion and contraction. Leafy spurge (Euphorbia esula) is       likely to contract. The retreat of once-intractable invasive       species could create restoration opportunities across       millions of hectares. Identifying and establishing native or       novel species in places where invasive species contract will       pose a considerable challenge for ecologists and land       managers. This challenge must be addressed before other       undesirable species invade and eliminate restoration       opportunities.
Copyright © SeedQuest - All rights reserved
