By ANDREW C. REVKIN, SHAN CARTER, JONATHAN ELLIS, FARHANA HOSSAIN AND ALAN MCLEAN
It is hard to see how legislation that, by design, raises the cost of energy will take hold in Congress while the economy remains in turmoil. Some environmentalists are pushing for a focus on more research or actions a president can take without legislation.
On the international front, prospects are poor for significant progress. Globally, and particularly in China and India, economies are being fueled mainly by an ever-expanding use of coal. The next president will take office just 11 months before a deadline that the world’s nations have set for a new climate treaty, a situation that many experts say almost guarantees a weak result.
Barack Obama
U.S. Senator
Senator Obama  envisions legislation that leaves scant wiggle room on emissions cuts and exacts a price from the start for emissions permits. He would use $15 billion a year from those proceeds to promote non-polluting energy sources and cut energy waste.
In the second debate, Mr. Obama said investments in boosting energy efficiency and the use of non-polluting sources would be part of his economic recovery plan and would not be sacrificed even under a constricted budget.
But he has been criticized by climate activists, who otherwise tend to support him, for statements about pursuing “clean coal” as a climate strategy, one that Mr. McCain also advocates. The phrase “clean coal” historically has applied to capturing sulfur dioxide and other contaminants released by burning coal. Capturing carbon dioxide, the main heat-trapping emission, is far harder.
Senator McCain  co-authored legislation in 2003 to cap greenhouse gases and said at a hearing: “It is time for the United States government to do its part to address this global problem, and a discussion of mandatory reductions is the form of leadership that is required.”
But this year, he has sometimes appeared to soften his stance. At a news conference in June, he said: “I believe in the cap-and-trade system, as you know. I would not at this time make those — impose a mandatory cap at this time. But I do believe that we have to establish targets for reductions of greenhouse gas emissions over time.”
His climate plan, like his opponent’s, includes a declining ceiling for emissions and allows polluters who surpass targets to sell credits to others who have fallen short. But under the McCain plan, the initial emissions permits would be given away, not sold, saving billions of dollars for the industries affected. Targets could also be achieved by investing in “carbon offsets,” which are produced by avoiding emissions elsewhere.
Global Warming and America’s Role
Says U.S. must lead global efforts to reduce emissions; would institute cap-and-trade system
“Strengthened institutions and invigorated alliances and partnerships are especially crucial if we are to defeat the epochal, man-made threat to the planet: climate change. ... As the world's largest producer of greenhouse gases, America has the responsibility to lead. While many of our industrial partners are working hard to reduce their emissions, we are increasing ours at a steady clip — by more than ten percent per decade. As president, I intend to enact a cap-and-trade system that will dramatically reduce our carbon dioxide emissions. ... Getting our own house in order is only a first step. ... We need a global response to climate change that includes binding and enforceable commitments to reducing emissions, especially for those that pollute the most: the United States, China, India, the European Union, and Russia.”
Says U.S. should work toward a global effort that would include developing countries
“I believe climate change is real. I think it’s devastating. I think we have to act and I agree with most experts that we may at some point reach a tipping point where we cannot save our climate. I don't think we’re there yet, but the overwhelming evidence is that greenhouse gases are contributing to warming of our earth and we have an obligation to take action to fix it. I believe that America did the right thing by not joining the Kyoto Treaty. But I believe that if we could get China and India into it, then the United States should seriously consider — on our terms — joining with every other nation in the world to try to reduce greenhouse gases. It's got to be a global effort.”
Details on a Cap-and-Trade Program
In a cap-and-trade program, the government would set a ceiling on carbon dioxide emissions and require companies to bid for permits to emit greenhouse gases through an auction.
Obama would auction 100 percent of the allowances to emit greenhouse gases
He wants to reduce carbon emissions 80 percent below 1990 levels by 2050, as recommended by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
McCain has not specified what share of the pollution permits he would auction
“Over time, an increasing fraction of permits for emissions could be supplied by auction.”
He wants to reduce carbon dioxide emissions 60 percent below 1990 levels by 2050.
Related article
Coal Plants and Coal-to-Liquid Fuel
Would consider banning new coal plants without “clean coal” technologies. Sponsored a bill with subsidies for development of liquid coal but later said he would support subsidies only if the fuel could be produced with 20 percent lower emissions than gasoline.
“While it is imperative that we advance clean coal technologies, we cannot stop our use of coal prior to the technology becoming market viable.”
Says coal-to-liquid may be viable if carbon capture and pollution control technology advances.
Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standard
Wants to increase standard
Establish targets for annual fuel economy increases while giving industry the flexibility to meet those targets.
Give auto companies tax credits and loan guarantees to retool their plants.
Give automakers health care assistance in exchange for their investing 50 percent of the savings into technology to produce more fuel-efficient vehicles.
Has voiced support for an increase but has not specified standard
“I’m open to negotiations. We obviously don’t want to drive all the car companies out of business. But there needs to be dramatic improvement and no loopholes.”
Other Proposals
Require all transportation fuels in the United States to contain 5 percent less carbon by 2015 and 10 percent less carbon by 2020.
Support alternative fuels.
Advocate a global effort that would include developing countries to reduce greenhouse gases.
Limit carbon emissions by harnessing market forces that will bring advanced technologies, such as nuclear energy, to the market faster.
Reduce dependence on foreign suppliers of energy.
Past Actions on the Issue
Co-sponsored the “Global Warming Pollution Reduction Act” of 2007, which would require the U.S. to reduce its emissions by 2050 to 80 percent below 1990 levels.
