The commercial industry can go a long way to help the United States bring     down its emissions. This section of EPA's Climate Change site provides     examples of the contributions businesses have made towards reducing U.S.     emissions; how to educate their industry, consumers, and employees about     global warming; and what further steps can be taken to further "lead   by example."
Businesses can take a lead role in reducing greenhouse gas emissions and     air pollution by implementing actions that save money, improve productivity,     protect the environment and increase the nation's energy security. Leading     companies that develop a comprehensive greenhouse gas management strategy     and pursue energy efficiency and pollution prevention stand to gain a competitive   edge over firms that fail to make these changes.
An increasing number of private firms now see significant opportunities in     addressing climate change. Thousands of companies are profiting from energy     efficiency improvements in their facilities and operations. Thousands more     are positioning themselves to be ready for new markets in energy-efficient     products and renewable energy technologies.
Industrial and commercial energy use accounts for nearly 30% of total     U.S. greenhouse gas emissions . These emissions primarily result from electricity     use, product transportation, burning fossil fuels to power boilers and produce     steam, and using gasoline to power vehicle fleets. Some industrial processes   also produce greenhouse gases.
Below are specific actions that businesses can take to reduce greenhouse   gas emissions while also saving money.
Manage and Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Leading businesses are taking steps to understand and manage their greenhouse     gas emissions by preparing annual greenhouse gas inventories and setting long-term     targets to reduce emissions. EPA's Climate     Leaders program provides technical assistance and recognition to U.S.   companies that have joined this program.
Educate
Business representatives can educate themselves, their customers and their     suppliers on the possible effects of future     climate change. Additional and active information sharing will expand the   base of ideas, opportunities and solutions for everyone.
Improve Energy Efficiency
Improving energy efficiency not only reduces greenhouse gas emissions into      the atmosphere, it is good for a corporation’s bottom line, as many       U.S. businesses face rising energy costs. Developing and implementing an      effective     corporate energy management program allows companies to manage energy with       the same expertise used to manage other aspects of their business. ENERGY        STAR offers tools and resources to help organizations improve their        energy performance. ENERGY STAR's flagship tool, Portfolio Manager , helps companies establish the current energy use of their         buildings,  and determine reasonable energy savings goals. ENERGY STAR         also has resources     for Small    Businesses .
Buy Renewable Energy
Your organization’s purchased  electricity use can be a significant source of air pollution and greenhouse gas  emissions. Buying green power, a subset of renewable energy, can help reduce  your organization’s environmental impact while also providing a number of other  valuable benefits. EPA's Green Power Partnership is a voluntary program that supports  the organizational procurement of green power by offering expert advice,  technical support, tools and resources.
Lead By Example
Leading businesses and corporations are evaluated on many aspects of their     performance, including product quality, ethics or standing in the community.     These leaders can provide a powerful example promoting greenhouse gas reduction     strategies through corporate incentives such as financial assistance for employees     who use public transportation, car-pooling and even telecommuting. Other "green"     practices such as recycling and purchasing recycled materials also contribute     to emissions reductions. Corporate policies involving employees and day-to-day   operations can have a positive impact on the climate in and outside the office.
