The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC, 2007 ) concluded      that there may be significant regional transitions associated with shifts      in forest location and composition in the U.S. due to climate change. Climate      change is likely to alter the geographic distribution of North American      forests, including regionally important tree species, such as New England      sugar maples and boreal forests in Alaska.
The effects of climate change on forests in the U.S. and other parts of the    world will depend not only on climatic factors but also on stresses from    pollution (e.g., acid rain); future trends in forest management practices,    including    fire control and demand for timber; and land-use change. It is difficult    to separate the influence of climate change from these other pressures.
Climate      change effects on forests are likely to include changes in forest      health and productivity and changes in the geographic range of certain      tree species. These effects can in turn alter timber production, outdoor      recreational activities, water quality, wildlife and rates of carbon    storage.
Climate Factors
In general, forests are sensitive to climatic variability    and change. Climatic factors that influence forest health-temperature,    rainfall, atmospheric levels of carbon dioxide (CO 2 )    and other greenhouse gases and extreme weather and fire events—are changing    and are expected to continue changing due to human activities.
The      following climate factors are likely to play an important role in determining    future forest conditions:
Air temperature
Atmospheric CO 2  concentrations
Climatic variability and the frequency and severity of extreme events
Indirect effects on pollution levels such as tropospheric ozone
Temperature and Precipitation
Changes in temperature and precipitation are expected to change forest location,    composition, and productivity. Climate change is likely to drive the migration    of tree species, resulting in changes in the geographic distribution    of forest types and new combinations of species within forests. In North America,    many   tree species may shift northward or to higher elevations. ( IPCC,   2007 )
Free-Air    CO 2  Enrichment ( FACE
)    experiments suggest that tree growth rates may increase with increasing    levels of    atmospheric CO 2 , but these effects are expected    to saturate over time as tree communities adjust to increased CO 2  levels.
Climate change effects that influence tree growth will also      alter rates of carbon storage (or sequestration) in      trees and soils. Increased carbon sequestration would remove more CO 2  from      the atmosphere (a negative feedback that lessens climate change), whereas      carbon losses through forest disturbances would result in more CO 2  entering      the atmosphere (a positive feedback that strengthens climate change). The IPCC ( 2007 ) concludes that “net carbon  uptake by terrestrial ecosystems is likely to peak before mid-century and then  weaken or even reverse, thus amplifying climate change.”
Fire and Disease
Changes in forest disturbance regimes, such as fire or disease, could also    affect the future of U.S. forests and the market for forest products, such    as timber. Increased temperatures could increase    fire risk  in    areas that become drier due to climate change. These changes could compound    existing    fire risks ( IPCC, 2007 ). Climate change could also promote    the rapid increase of diseases and pests that attack tree species. Such    disturbances may be detrimental to forests themselves, but may have a lesser    impact at    the market level due to salvage operations that harvest timber from dying    forests ( Shugart, et al., 2003 ).
The IPCC concluded   that, for North America as a whole ( IPCC, 2007 ):
Climate change is expected to increase the growth      of forests modestly (by 10-20 percent) over the next century.   However, extreme and/or long-term      climate change scenarios also create the potential for widespread forest     decline.
Disturbances such as wildfires and insect  outbreaks are increasing and likely to intensify in a warmer climate with drier  soils and longer growing seasons. The forest fire season is likely to lengthen,  and the area subject to high fire danger is likely to increase significantly.
The long-term           effects of fire will depend heavily on changes in human fire management         activities.
Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Parry, Martin L., Canziani, Osvaldo F., Palutikof, Jean P., van der Linden, Paul J., and Hanson, Clair E. (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 1000 pp.
.       Contribution of Working Group II to the Third Assessment Report of the       Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [McCarthy, James J., Canziani,       Osvaldo F., Leary, Neil A., Dokken, David J., and White, Kasey S. (eds.)].       Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY,       USA, 1032pp.
