IMPROVING AIR QUALITY IN US
The US Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) has reported annual trends of air quality and acid rain data. Both sets of data show that air quality improvements are occurring despite increases in vehicle distance travelled and energy consumption. The report Latest Findings on National Air Quality: 2002 Status and Trends, shows that the six main pollutants: - carbon monoxide, lead, nitrogen dioxide, ozone, sulphur dioxide and particulate matter, have been cut by 48% since 1970.
Sulphur dioxide emissions from power plants in the US were 10.2 million tonnes in 2002, a reduction of 9% from the figures for 2000, and 41% lower than in 1980. Nitrogen oxide emissions were down by 13% from 2000 to 4.5 million tonnes.
The EPA expect air quality to improve even more over coming years due to the introduction of Clear Skies Act, which calls for a 70% reduction in sulphur dioxide, nitrogen oxides and mercury. However, critics claim that cleaner air could be achieved by enforcing the current clean air act, holding polluters responsible for the damage they do, and investing in environmental technology and renewable energy sources.
Source: www.edie.net (19th September 2003)
AIR INDUSTRY CHARGING
A report by the UK Commission for Integrated Transport (CIFT) has called for major increases to air operators and their customers, to make the aviation industry more sustainable and responsible and to operate the principles of 'the polluter pays'.
The CIFT allege that airlines are responsible for far more pollution than they are held accountable for. Chairman of the CIFT, Professor David Begg, states that "Airports have a huge impact on the communities they serve as well as on the environment at large and we need to make sure that, in a world of growing demand, environmental impact is kept to a manageable minimum. What we are proposing is nothing short of a radical reform to make operators and passengers confront the environmental consequences of their actions."
The CIFT report highlights the rapid growth of air passengers in the UK over the past 20 years, from 50 million to 162 million, which has largely been a result of falling airfares. At present, Aviation Passenger Duty raises around half of the £1.4 billion costs of climate change emissions which the aviation industry are responsible for in the UK.
The study also predicts an increase in greenhouse gas emissions from aviation. Ten years ago air operations were producing 3.5% of worldwide emissions; this is expected to rise to 15% in 2050.
Source: www.edie.net (5th September 2003)
AIR POLLUTION REDUCTIONS HELP FORESTS
Reductions in the levels of sulphur and nitrogen in European forests have led to a recovery in damaged trees. Scientists, however, have stressed the need for further emissions cuts to address remaining air pollution problems. The latest report from the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe on European forest conditions highlights the benefits of reduced emissions, but reports that a fifth of the trees studied were damaged. A high percentage of trees still have damaged crowns.
Scientists took samples from 7,000 observation points across 36 European countries. Southern Europe was affected by high concentrations of ozone; ozone injury was found to be visible on the leaves of beech trees and some ground vegetation species that had not previously been known to be ozone sensitive. Emission reductions from countries like the Soviet Union are likely to be the result of lower production levels. Scientists therefore emphasize that cleaner production technologies should be encouraged.
Source: www.edie.net (5th September 2003)
STROKE RISK MAY BE LINKED TO AIR POLLUTION
Researchers in Taiwan have found that at times of high air pollution, hospital admissions increased. The increase in admissions seems to correlate well with high levels of nitrogen dioxide and particulate pollution.  In hot weather, when temperatures were greater than 20°C the problem seemed to be worse according to the scientists.
Previous research studies have shown a link between air pollution and death rates from respiratory and heart disease but there has been no clear link with air pollution and strokes. The research in Taiwan involved data from more than 23,000 hospital admissions from 1997 to 2000 in Kaohsiung, Taiwan's second city, an area of heavy industry. Air pollution levels on the dates of admissions were compared with air pollution levels one week before and one week after admissions to hospital.
A rise in levels of both pollutants was linked to a significant increase in the number of people admitted to hospital with either of the most common type of stroke - one caused by a burst blood vessel in the brain, the other by a clot blocking blood flow to the brain.  The research suggests that the higher the pollutant level, the greater the risk of both types of stroke.  It is thought amongst experts that air pollution makes the blood stickier, making it tougher for the heart to pump it round the body. This is thought to increase the risk of blood clotting and damage to the blood vessels.
Source: http://news.bbc.co.uk (10th October 2003)
CLIMATE CHANGE
STORM DAMAGE INSURANCE PREMIUMS COULD SOAR IN BRITAIN
According to a study commissioned by the Association of British Insurers (ABI), building insurance premiums could soar in Britain and particularly in London and the South-East in the coming years unless more is done to defend homes from storm damage. Climate change is expected to push wind speeds in the South of England up by as much as 10% and dramatically increase the frequency of major storms.  An average of 200,000 UK homes a year suffer wind damage, more than those affected by flooding. Property insurance claims were £2.1bn after the storms of 1990 and the average bill from weather-related damage has risen to £825m a year in the past decade.
The ABI report reveals that London and its surrounding area are most at risk in the future due to the high percentage of older properties and the fact that depression tracts are due to shift south from the North Atlantic. Storms this time last year, which brought gusts of 70 mph to the capital, caused insured losses of more than £150m. Globally since 1987, storms have caused $8.1bn (£4.8bn) more insured losses a year than flooding.
Source: This is London (The Evening Standard) 28th October 2002, http://www.thisislondon.co.uk/news/
DROUGHT POSSIBLE IN SOUTH EAST ENGLAND
Figures from the UK Meteorological Office reveal that South East England had the driest August and September since 1873, with only 27 millimetres of rain - just 23% of the average of 119 millimetres. Across much of the UK, rainfall during the last nine months has been lower than at any time since 1921, and in some areas, it has been the driest nine-month period on record. The Environment Agency has warned that with a further prolonged absence of rainfall and failure to conserve existing supplies, some areas could face critical water shortages.
Source: BBC News online, 22nd October 2003, http://news.bbc.co.uk
WAS THERE REALLY A MEDIEVAL WARM PERIOD?
The idea that there is no need to worry about human-induced global warming because the world's climate in medieval time was at least as warm as today's is flawed, according to a recent analysis reported in the journal Science. "Climate in Medieval Time," by Raymond S. Bradley of the University of Massachusetts - Amherst, Malcolm K. Hughes of the University of Arizona Laboratory of Tree-Ring Research, and Henry F. Diaz of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Office of Atmospheric Research suggests that there is not enough evidence to conclude that the Medieval Warm Period was global, or that regional warm spells between 500 and 1500 A.D. occurred simultaneously.
To reconstruct climate, scientists use natural archives, including tree rings, ice cores and laminated sediments. These natural records of temperature, precipitation and other environmental history have been carefully calibrated with instrumental observations, giving scientists quantitative information on past conditions at particular locations. Unfortunately, most of these records come from the temperate zones in the Northern Hemisphere. Few come from the tropics, and only a handful come from the Southern Hemisphere.
According to the reconstructions temperatures during High Medieval time (1100 to 1200 A.D.) in the Northern Hemisphere were probably one-third of a degree Celsius cooler, on average, than those of the last three decades of the 20th century, although close to those from 1901 to 1970. Furthermore, not areas were found to have warmed, with significant regional variations.
A common argument for the existence of a global Medieval Warm Period is that the amount of solar radiation hitting Earth's atmosphere was as high in medieval time as in the 20th century. The corollary, therefore, is that the 20th century global warming has been largely driven by the sun, not by higher concentrations of heat-trapping greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.
However, increases in solar radiation do not warm Earth's surface at all locations. Rather, ozone absorbs ultraviolet radiation, warming the stratosphere and altering atmospheric circulation patterns. The influence on tropospheric and surface temperature is complex and there is no obvious relationship between solar irradiance and global average surface temperature. Frequent volcanic eruptions from 1100 to 1260 A.D. may have added to the regional variation. Volcanic eruptions may have resulted in mild winters in northern and western Europe during High Medieval time.
Source: Science Daily, 20th October 2003, http://www.sciencedaily.com/
ARCTIC WARMING UP FASTER
A NASA study published in the American Meteorological Society's Journal of Climate warns that the rate of warming in the Arctic is speeding up and may affect the whole planet in complex ways which are not yet understood. According to the research, the rate of warming in the Arctic over the last 20 years is eight times greater than the rate over the entire last 100 years. Temperatures are increasing at an average of 1.22°C per decade over most of the Arctic, although some areas, including Greenland, are actually cooling. Summer ice cover in the Arctic has also been declining at a rate of 9% per decade and is close to the record low set last year.
Source: CANOE (Canadian News), 28th October 2002, http://www.canoe.ca/
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
NEW OFFSHORE WIND FARM
The UK Government has given the go ahead for a 30-turbine wind farm near Skegness, off the Lincolnshire coast, which will provide green power for more than 60,000 homes, the project's developer Offshore Wind Power Limited has said. The wind farm at Inner Dowsing will have a capacity of between 60 and 120 megawatts with construction set to begin next year. Offshore Wind Power is a joint venture between Renewable Energy Systems and nuclear generator British Energy
The project is one of 18 offshore wind schemes around the coast of Britain, which were granted seabed leases in 2001 in the Government's first round of offshore development. Twelve projects have been given permission to begin construction, totalling more than 1,200 megawatts of capacity. The Government sees expanding offshore wind power as key to meeting its target of generating 10% of the UK's electricity from green sources by 2010, up from 3% now.
Source: Planetark (daily new story), 23rd October 2003, http://www.planetark.org/
THE TRUE PRICING OF DRIVING TO WORK
A litre of petrol consumed driving (about 15km) to work would have required 23.5 tonnes of ancient, buried plants to produce, or the equivalent of 16,200 square meters of wheat, roots and stalks included.
The long, slow process that converts plant matter into oil is extremely inefficient, says ecologist Jeff Dukes of Carnegie Institution of Washington, Stanford, who did the calculations. Less than one part in 10,000 of the organic matter becomes oil.
According to Dukes, in 1997 the world burned fossil fuels equivalent to more than 400 times the amount of plant matter produced on Earth in the same year.
Source: Nature (science update), 29th October 2003, http://www.nature.com/nsu/
