TOUGHER AIR POLLUTION STANDARDS SET FOR UK
The Environment Minister, Michael Meacher has announced a number of tougher targets to update the Air Quality Strategy. The pollutants which are to be included are particulates (PM10), carbon monoxide and benzene with the addition of a new standard for polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs).
A new objective for London has also been set for particulates. The new objectives for PM10 allow far fewer exceedences of the daily mean of 50µg/m3. Currently 35 exceedences per year are allowable, but this has been reduced to 7 per year except in London where 10 will be allowed. This objective is to achieved by 2010.
In addition, the PM10 annual objective, is to be halved to 20 µg/m3, whilst London is to achieve 23 µg/m3. The reason that London has slightly less stringent targets is that London currently has much higher levels of pollution compared with the rest of the UK. The Government feels that the challenge to meet these new targets will be equally as great for London as elsewhere in the UK.
The new targets for particulates follow advice from the Committee on Medical Effects of Air Pollution (COMEAP), who reported in May 2001 on the long term health effects of particles. Particles are associated with a range of short-term health effects, including effects on the cardiovascular and respiratory systems, asthma and death. COMEAP suggest that long-term exposure to particles increases premature death, particularly from heart disease.
COMEAP estimates that the long-term effect of exposure to particulates has a much greater (around ten times) effect on life expectancy than short-term exposure. In particular, the Committee suggest that reducing long-term exposure to particulates to those susceptible to air pollution such as children and the elderly could increase life expectancy by several months.
The new standards proposed by the government are as follows:
Particles (PM10)
20µg/m3 (annual mean) by end 2010.
London
23µg/m3 (annual mean) by end 2010.
Benzene
Carbon Monoxide
PAHs (new standard)
Source: DEFRA News Release, 5 August 2002
US TO RELAX EMISSION RULES FOR WORST POLLUTING POWER PLANTS
The Bush administration in the US has announced that air pollution emissions legislation will be relaxed for old power stations when they are to be repaired or expanded.
However, a report from the General Accounting Office (GAO) shows that ageing US coal fired power plants release approximately twice as much sulphur dioxide compared to newer power plants.
The GAO compared emissions from old and new power plants in 2000. The older power stations produced around twice as much sulphur dioxide and 25% more nitrogen oxides than the newer plants which are required to meet higher environmental standards.
The GAO report was requested by Senator Jim Jeffords who heads the Senate Environment Committee and opposes the Bush administration plan to ease emissions for older power plants.
Source: www.e-volve.org.uk/ (4 July 2002).
UK AIR QUALITY EXPERTS
The members of the new Air Quality Experts Group have been announced. The AQEG is to be chaired by Professor Mike Pilling of Leeds University and is made up of 18 scientists with a range of skills and expertise in the field of air pollution.
The Air Quality Expert Group will advise Government on levels and sources of pollution, analyse trends of pollution concentrations and assess the impact of proposed reduction strategies.
The full list of members of AQEG can be found at:
AIRPORT EXPANSION AND HOME DEMOLITIONS
New Government plans have been revealed for coping with the rising demand in air travel throughout the UK. This is largely to be met through airport expansions; possibly three new runways for Stansted, a third runway for Heathrow and new runways at Glasgow or Edinburgh, Birmingham and Bristol.
A third runway at Heathrow may however cause many thousands of homes to be demolished because of increased air pollution levels. Notes contained within the consultation documents make reference to homes being pulled down where pollution exceeds EU limits. If a third runway were to be built at Heathrow, many thousands of people could be exposed to levels of air pollution above EU limits unless aviation technology advances at a much faster rate to reduce emissions from aircraft. The areas facing the greatest pollution include Sipson, Harlington, Hayes and West Drayton.
Source: www.bbc.co.uk/ (23 July 2002, 2 August 2002).
CONGESTION CHARGING FOR LONDON TO GO AHEAD
London has finally been given the go-ahead to charge motorists for congestion. Westminster Council lost their appeal against the congestion charges at the High Court. From next February, motorists will be charged £5 to drive into central London.
Westminster Council appealed, suggesting that making a charge to drive through central London would increase air pollution in surrounding areas. Many councils around the UK will now be watching to see how the congestion-charging scheme works before trying it out for themselves.
The Freight Transport Association feels that charging will not reduce the number of lorries passing through London, but that it will just put up costs.
The Mayor of London, Ken Livingstone expects traffic to be reduced by 10%-15% through congestion charging and he plans to invest profits into public transport.
Source: www.bbc.co.uk/ (31 July 2002).
CLIMATE CHANGE
HEALTH EFFECTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE IN THE UK
Warmer winters could mean 20,000 fewer deaths and cut hospital admissions by two million days as global climate change heats up Britain, a report by leading scientists from the Department of Health disclosed last month.
Summers, however, will become deadlier as scientists predict a rise in average temperatures that will bring more cases of skin cancer, heat stroke and food poisoning. Heat-related deaths are projected to rise by 2,000 a year from the present rate of about 800, with skin cancer affecting between 5,000 and 30,000 more people annually, according to the report.
A sustained increase in temperatures may also bring long-term physiological changes, such as thinner blood, which will be a positive health benefit. According to one calculation there could be two million fewer days spent in hospital by 2050 as a result.
The Department of Health report, which builds upon last year's Health Effects of Climate Change in the UK (April 2001), looks at whether the NHS will be able to cope with the rapidly changing weather patterns experienced by the UK. It forecasts several thousand extra deaths each summer from the effects of air pollutants by 2050.
In addition, malaria-carrying mosquitoes may return to southern England, food poisoning cases may rise by 10,000 a year and the stronger sun could result in 2,000 more cases of eye cataracts.
Last year's report, the Health Effects of Climate Change in the UK is available through the Department of Health website:
YET ANOTHER WARM YEAR
In August the UK Met Office announced that globally, January to June this year has been the second warmest on record, beaten only by 1998, which had a warmer start because of the influence of El Niño.
According to Met Office data, the first six months of 2002 have been the warmest in the Northern Hemisphere since records began 143 years ago, whilst the temperature for the Earth as a whole was the second highest. Closer to home, although temperatures in England and Wales were below average for much of this summer, for the first half of the year the temperature was more than a degree above average.
PLANTS FLOWERING EARLIER
According to scientists at the University of York, many British plants are now flowering earlier than they did in the middle of the 20th century.
Writing in the journal Science  ( vol. 296 ), A.H. Fitter and R.S.R. Fitter have found that the average first flowering date of 385 species of plant was about 4½ days earlier for the decade 1991 to 2000 than it had been during the period 1954 to 1990. Of these species, nearly one sixth flowered significantly earlier whilst only 3% were found to be flowering later.
For summer-flowering species, late winter temperatures had the greatest influence, although they were found to be less temperature-sensitive than spring flowering plants.
Source: Global Environmental Change Report, 12th July 2002
ASIAN BROWN CLOUD
Last month, a dense blanket of pollution, dubbed the "Asian Brown Cloud" that develops each summer, returned to cover much of South Asia, with scientists warning it could pose a global threat.
The cloud, estimated to be two miles thick, is believed to be responsible for hundreds of thousands of deaths a year from respiratory disease. By reducing sunlight levels by 10 to 15%, the smog has also altered the region's climate, cooling the ground while heating the atmosphere.
Lying over the entire Indian subcontinent, from Sri Lanka to Afghanistan, the pollution has led to some erratic weather, sparking flooding in Bangladesh, Nepal and northeastern India, but drought in Pakistan and northwestern India. It is also causing acid rain.
Scientists have calculated that the cloud is largely the result of man-made pollution, in particular emissions from inefficient cookers, where fuels such as cow dung and kerosene are used to cook food in many parts of Asia.
While scientists say they still need more scientific data, they suggest the regional and global impact of the cloud will intensify over the next 30 years.
Source: CNN , 12th August 2002
EL NIÑO RETURNS
During August, more than 70 people were killed by floods in China as heavy rains cause havoc across many parts of Asia, with floods destroying huge areas of eastern India, Nepal and Bangladesh. The onset of a new El Niño episode has been blamed as the likely culprit.
El Niño refers to an above-average warming of ocean water in the eastern Pacific that occurs every 4 to 5 years and distorts wind and rainfall patterns, leading to floods and droughts. The last El Niño in 1997-98 is believed to be responsible for the loss of around 24,000 lives.
Australia meanwhile is experiencing a prolonged winter drought. Farmers in the eastern state of New South Wales have now gone months without substantial rain, slashing the yields of wheat crops and forcing livestock to be slaughtered.
It seems that Europe has not escaped the effects of the erratic weather either. Devastating floods due to record rainfall also hit parts of the Czech Republic and Austria last month. Scientists have speculated that El Niño may influence the course of the Northern Hemisphere Jet Stream, which this summer has tracked across Europe, further south than usual bringing depressions and bad weather.
Source: CNN , 12th August 2002; BBC News , 11th August 2002
