EU OZONE REMAINS POOR
The 1998 and 1999 annual ground level ozone reports for the European Commission show no overall reduction in the exposure of the population or ecosystems to ozone. The reports identified that levels of ozone measured at most of the 1400 monitoring sites remain well above the ceilings set by the European Council's Framework Directive on ozone (Directive 92/72/EC).
During 1998, the warning level (360µg/m
3
) was exceeded by eight monitoring stations in Greece, Italy and France. In 1999, the warning level was not exceeded but the level for informing the population (180µg/m
3
) was exceeded by all EU members except Denmark, Finland, Sweden and Ireland. In Italy, France, Spain and Greece, this level remained for prolonged periods (40 - 60 days).
The vegetation protection limit of 200µg/m
3
Source: AECC newsletter Jan-Feb 2000.
PARTICULATE EPISODES FROM SAHARAN & VOLCANIC DUST
Several particulate (PM10) monitors recorded exceedences of the 50µg/m
3
target throughout the UK during early March 2000. The sources of these episodes have been identified as dust blown from the North African Saharan desert and from the Icelandic Hekla volcanic eruption.
PM2.5 monitors were expected to register these particles, but not the PM10 monitors which record coarser particles. The Expert Panel of Air Quality Scientists (EPAQS) are currently considering whether to introduce PM2.5 for air quality standards, as in the United States. Fine particles are known to be more problematic for human health than coarser particles because they can enter deep into the lungs.
The maximum hourly concentration was recorded at Plymouth (290µg/m
3
); Port Talbot also monitored several exceedences on March 3rd. At many sites, this natural particulate episode accounts for 5 of the 35 exceedences allowed in the new Air Quality Strategy objectives for PM10 (see Atmospheric Issues March 2000), thus in some way justifying the relaxation of the target which previously allowed only 4 exceedences per year.
Sources: Air Quality Management, April 2000; Netcen: http://www.aeat.co.uk/netcen/airqual/
aric
RECEIVES FURTHER ONE YEAR BOOST FOR INFORMATION PROGRAMME
aric have received a further year of Environmental Action Fund support from DETR to continue work on the Atmosphere, Climate & Environment Information Programme. Over the year 2000/01, aric expects to deal with in excess of 8000 information requests and will continue to focus on information provision particularly via the aric website. aric is also pleased to report its acceptance of a Britannia Internet award for quality and accuracy of site content.
RESEARCH LINKS PARTICLES FROM POWER LINES TO CANCER
Researchers at Bristol University have identified that radiation from overhead high voltage power lines can increase exposure to particles. The corona ions emitted by power lines may attach to larger particles which can enter the lungs and lodge there as charged particles. Health effects including leukaemia have been linked to living near electromagnetic magnetic sources, although a causal link had not been identified. The findings from Bristol may provide some links.
A further study by the same team conducted experiments on crude model heads (earthed metal spheres) which were placed under electricity pylons. These showed an increase in particle deposition of 1.5 - 3 times. The particles contained radon thus also suggesting the possibility of increased risk of skin cancer for those living near power lines. For further information contact Professor Henshaw at Bristol University (0117 926 0353).
Sources: Bristol University; Air Quality Management, April 2000.
BROWN'S BUDGET IMPACTS AIR QUALITY
In March's Budget the Chancellor, Gordon Brown, announced several measures which should help to improve air quality. These are summarised below:
City petrol falls by 1p per litre (low sulphur), other fuels to increase by 2p per litre;
Vehicle Excise Duty (VED) discounts now eligible for cars with engine size less than 1200cc;
Penalty VED system to reflect vehicles with high CO
2
Discounts on VED for alternative fuel users.
Sources: Air Quality Management, April 2000; BBC website http://news2.thls.bbc.co.uk/hi/english/in_depth/uk/2000/budget2000/default.stm
NEW WEBSITE ADDRESS FOR NSCA
You may wish to bookmark the new web address for National Society for Clean Air, which is as follows:
CUTTING AIR POLLUTION EMISSIONS IN WESTMINSTER
Westminster City Council in London has decided to concentrate on cutting emissions from heavy trucks and buses rather than cars in an attempt to improve air quality. Westminster proposes to cut emissions from heavy duty vehicles by setting up low emission zones. These may ban trucks unless they have a permit to confirm their vehicle meets Euro 2 emission standards or better.
Sources: Air Quality Management, April 2000; http://www.westminster.gov.uk/ep/airquality/index.htm
CLIMATE CHANGE
WARMEST WINTER ON RECORD IN THE U.S.
According to the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), the winter of 1999/2000 was the warmest in the United States since records began more than a century ago. This was the third year in a row of increasingly record warm winters, with average surface temperature during December to February 0.3
o
C above the previous year's record.  Accompanying the record warmth has been a sustained period of drought for much of the continental US. Below average rainfall is predicted to continue into 2000 due to the La Niña pattern in the equatorial Pacific, the reverse (cold) phase of El Niño.
More information can be found at NOAA's website at:
1998 UK GREENHOUSE GAS ESTIMATES
In March the Department of the Environment, Transport & The Regions (DETR) published the 1998 emission estimates for greenhouse gases and other air pollutants, and a provisional 1999 estimate of total carbon dioxide emissions, for the UK. The key points to note are:
Emissions of the 'basket' of six greenhouse gases, weighted by global warming potential, fell by 8.5% between 1990 and 1998. To meet its commitment to the Kyoto Protocol, the UK has agreed to reduce emissions by 12.5% relative to the 1990 level over the period 2008-2012.
Emissions of carbon dioxide, the main greenhouse gas, fell by 7% between 1990 and 1998. The UK aims to move beyond its Kyoto target towards its goal of reducing emissions of carbon dioxide by 20% below 1990 levels by 2010.
1999 emissions of carbon dioxide are provisionally estimated at 155.5 million tonnes (weight of carbon), about 0.5% lower than in 1998 and 7.5% lower than in 1990.
Source: Department of the Environment, Transport & The Regions Press Release, 30th March 2000.
ANTARCTIC MELTING
This March, one of the largest icebergs ever recorded broke off of Antarctica's Ross Ice Shelf. The immense block of ice - dubbed B15 - is 300 kilometres (186 miles) long and 37 kilometres (23 miles) wide, and is over a quarter of the size of Switzerland.
Icebergs like B15 occur when ice at the edge of an ice shelf finally succumbs to the forces of the sea, which include warmer temperatures, currents and tides.
According to the U.S. National Science Foundation's McMurdo Station in Antarctica the calving off of this tremendous iceberg is quite normal. Researchers believe that icebergs like B15 break away from all Antarctic ice shelves every 50 to 100 years as part of their natural cycle of ice loss and regeneration. According to iceberg observation records, the Ross Ice Shelf has been due for a major purge.
Researchers also note that this event is probably not a global warming issue at this time, but scientists will be keeping an eye on this area to see if anymore very large icebergs break free in the near future.
Source: Environmental News Network, http://www.enn.com/topics/climate/
TRANSPORT
MONEY FOR PUBLIC TRANPSORT
A £280 million budget bonus has been given for the improvement of the UK's transport network. In March, Lord Macdonald, the Minister for Transport, outlined how the money would be spent. Key spending areas include public transport, schemes to tackle congestion, better road safety and free bus passes for all pensioners.
The package includes:
£15m for preparatory work on the £500 million extensions to the Manchester Metrolink (tram).
£30m as a contribution to the cost of extending the Docklands Light Railway to the City Airport, subject to statutory procedures.
£14m to abolish charges for bus passes for pensioners, with half price travel.
£5m extra for 20 new innovative bus schemes in rural areas.
£5m to support child road safety education and information
£30m for local authorities to spend on schemes for child safety and safe routes to school, and small scale improvements including bus priority measures.
£6m for cleaning up existing diesel buses and taxis in cities.
Source: Department of the Environment, Transport & The Regions Press Release, 24th March 2000.
ENERGY
GLOBAL WIND POWER
Global wind power capacity will more than triple over the five years to 2003, Danish wind energy consultancy BTM Consult ApS has forecast. Installed capacity was just 10,000 megawatts (MW) at the end of 1998, but it is expected to soar by 21,000 MW by 2003. The consultancy said there were far-reaching plans for big offshore windmills and that Europe would remain the main growth region for windmill sales.
Source: Environment On-line, International Network for the Environment: http://www.environmentonline.org/
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
SUSTAINABLE EDUCATION
A new approach to learning in workplaces and the community as well as classrooms was called for today by Government Panel on Sustainable Development Education. In April the Sustainable Development Education Panel, an independent advisory group, published 'plain English' leaflets for schools, colleges, professionals, employers, youth workers, museums, libraries and the public sector on how to promote education for sustainable development. It has also published its second annual report.
The Panel's annual report also sets out its priorities for the coming year, which includes working with teachers, professional bodies and local and regional government.
Source: Department of the Environment, Transport & The Regions Press Release, 12th April 2000.
