All News
Buzz up!
AFP – Flooded farm land of southern Punjab in Pakistan. Eight million people in Pakistan remain dependent on …
– Tue Sep 7, 2:30 am ET
STOCKHOLM  (AFP) – The drought in Russia and floods in Pakistan are part of a global trend of unpredictable weather patterns and rainfall that threaten food security, experts gathered in Stockholm said.
"We are getting to a point where we are getting more water, more rainy days, but it's more variable, so it leads to droughts and it leads to floods," Sunita Narain, the head of the Centre for Science and Environment in India, told AFP on the sidelines of the World Water Week conference.
"That is leading to huge amounts of stress on agriculture and livelihoods," she said, adding that "climate change is making rainfall even more variable."
Narain was one of around 2,500 experts from 130 countries gathered in Stockholm for the 20th edition of the World Water Week, which opened Sunday and is set to run until Saturday.
Her comments came as eight million people in Pakistan remain dependent on handouts for their survival after monsoons caused devastating floods throughout the country.
Russia is also still struggling with the aftermath of its hottest summer on record, during which drought and fires destroyed a quarter of the country's crops and prompted the government to slap a highly controversial ban on grain exports to protect domestic supplies.
This contributed to soaring global wheat and overall food prices and sparked worries of a crisis in global food supplies.
But it is not only in such extreme cases that changing weather patterns and unpredictable rainfall is causing problems.
"Millions of farmers in communities dependent on rain-fed agriculture are at risk from decreasing and erratic availability of water," head of the Sri Lanka-based International Water Management Institute (IWMI) Colin Chartres said in a statement.
IWMI published a report Monday stressing that the unpredictable weather required large investments in a diverse array of water storage options to counter the uncertainty.
Some 66 percent of total crops in Asia are not irrigated, while in Africa a full 94 percent is rain-fed, according to the institute, which estimates that around 500 million people in Africa and India would benefit from improved agricultural water management.
World Water Week director Jens Berggren agreed that unpredictable rainfall was wreaking havoc.
"Climate change will lead to different weather patterns, and that is what we are already seeing in many places like Pakistan and Russia. It doesn't rain the way it used to," he told AFP.
Farmers in Uganda for instance used to know when to sow to get the best crop, but now they can no longer predict when the rain will come, Berggren pointed out.
"So they sow a little bit all the time to be on the safe side. They know their harvest could at any moment be washed away or dry up, so they try to spread the risk as much as possible," he said.
"But this means that they get much smaller harvests than before," he added.
While accepting that the world has recently experienced extreme weather shifts, Jan Lundqvist, who chairs the Stockholm International Water Institute's Scientific Programme Committee, is wary on blaming global warming.
Pointing out that there have been periods of extreme weather patterns before, he said: "These kinds of fluctuations are part of human history, but climate change is probably making them more extreme."
Follow Yahoo! News on Twitter , become a fan on Facebook
Buzz up!
Doom & gloom Doom & gloom. I'm not sharing my garden with garden with anybody. All the welfare bums can starve for all i care. they sit on their haunches all the time waiting for hand-outs. lazy @#$ learn to take care of your selves, use that thing in your head called a brain and do something for your selfs.
try HAARP
let's go shopping Nancy
sardines again for dinner
KFC is still open
We have been warned of this for years on end and nothing was done about it so as it progress even worst we are suffering the out come of global change.
As the atmosphere changes, the patterns of winds and particularly the Jet Stream also change.   What we are seeing are massive changes in the Jet Stream.   In the end, it doesn't matter if it's caused by 'man-caused global warming', 'natural climatic fluctuations', or god playing dice with the environment.    It's a very big problem and it's going to get worse because we have altered the natural balance of the world so much.
When essential water become scarce or doesn't come at all, or when it comes all at once so that it runs off destroying the productive land as it goes; when previously fertile group becomes swamps or baked deserts....it sets the scenario for violent conflict as people try to survive just another day.   No country or people are going to be immune to the results.
For those of survivalist mentality....when everything is chaos who are you going to trust?   Your stocked supplies will not last forever and no matter how well armed you might think you are, you cannot stand against 4 billion desperate people who will do anything to survive...just like you would.
We can either start working seriously to come up with mitigations that will help us all survive or we can continue with the tunnel vision that says it's not happening or it won't affect us, and find out the hard way that we can either hang separately or together, but hang we will.
The term climate change was actually coined by Frank Luntz, a Republican strategist.   Today, he admits that man made global warming is a serious issue that needs to be addressed.
These "clowns" Silas, don't reference it as man made because it is a given.
BTW if this is AGW is so such a hoax then:
- Why do energy companies use the same "think tanks" and lobbying groups used by tobacco companies? Wouldn't it be much simpler to simply pat qualified scientists top dollar to refute this scam?   Or better yet, offer up a $5MM prize for the person who can bury these alarmists with non-refutable facts?????? I can see Smooth Criminal applying now for the prize money now!
- Why are creationist organizations such as the Discovery Group also involved with the denialist campaign against global warming?
The growers will have to reapply fertilizer after every smaller flood, which they can not possibly afford. Additionally, limestone to correct acidity caused by too much washout will be necessary at additional cost. Many more will starve, as we will be addressing our own weather problems here. This policy of ignorance will have a bad ending
Whether or not we want to say Global Warming is the culprit, the bottom line is the water wars are starting.   With less and less food security we are going to see many more wars and violence.   Perhaps its time to revisit the removal of some of the dams that are stopping the flow of water down stream.   The IMF and WTO should look at funding the removal of at least ten major dams.   The alternative costs to world security and human suffering will be much higher than the cost of dam removal.   Just a thought.
Comments 1 - 10 of 39
Most Viewed - Science
Sponsored Links
Penny Stocks Trading Community Sign up now for 100% free penny stock alerts. Watch your profits soar. PennyStockAlley.com
Featured
The Topic Your comments on ... race, rumors and restraint
Education Yahoo
Nurses Needed: 2018 & Beyond Find out how online training can get you into this growing, stable job - fast!
Report: College Is Key To Employment Recent report suggests college will be the key to employment for years to come.
Yahoo! News Navigation
