WELCOME TO ATMOSPHERIC ISSUES
In Februray 1998, ARIC was awarded a further Environmental Action Fund award from the UK Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions, for the 1998/99 financial year. The new Atmosphere, Climate and Environment Information Programme will continue the work of ARIC’s air quality and climate change information programmes. Consequently, the new title of this newsletter reflects a change in the emphasis of articles to be included in the newsletter. A broader spectrum of issues relating to atmospheric pollution will be included from this edition onwards, to include for example, articles on global warming, air quality, acidification and energy efficiency / controlling emissions. We hope that you will continue to find the newsletter of interest.
AIR POLLUTION DEATHS ESTIMATED AT 12,000 - 24,000 IN UK EACH YEAR
A new report by the Committee on the Medical Effects of Air Pollutants (COMEAP), an independent expert panel commissioned by the Department of Health, has been published entitled Quantification of the effects of air pollution on health in the United Kingdom. The report has for the first time attempted to estimate the number of premature deaths brought on by air pollution. Between 12 000 and 24 000 deaths per year have been estimated although the report identifies the difficulty in obtaining such figures as it is unknown how long victims would have lived had they not been exposed to the air pollution. Most deaths are among elderly people already experiencing respiratory illnesses, who may have had very short life expectancies due to their conditions.
COMEAP concentrated their report on three pollutants; particles, sulphur dioxide and ozone. High levels of particulates in urban areas were identified as being responsible for around 8,100 deaths and 10,500 hospital admissions each year.   The Catalytic Systems Division of Johnson Matthey have responded to the report by offering a solution to reduce particulate levels from diesel vehicles. They claim that British technology such as their CRT diesel particulate filter trap can dramatically reduce particulate emissions and thus contribute to cleaner air in the UK.
The COMEAP report is available from The Stationery Office, price £16.50 (Tel: +44 (0)171 873 0011).
Sources:  Air Quality Management, February 1998; NSCA News Release, 13 Jan. 1998; Johnson Matthey News Release, 16 Jan. 1998.
1997 WARMEST YEAR ON RECORD
Analyses of global surface temperature from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), NASA, the World Meteorological Organisation (WMO) and the UK-based Climate Research Unit have all confirmed that 1997 was the warmest year on record. According to the available temperature data sets, average global surface temperature was approximately 0.4
o
C above the 1961-1990 average. 1997 ranked slightly higher than the last warmest year in 1995. According to Phil Jones of the Climate Research Unit at the University of East Anglia, the 5 warmest years on record have occurred during the 1990s, whilst 9 of the 10 warmest years have occurred since the beginning of the 1980s.
It is widely believed that the current El Niño episode in the tropical Pacific Ocean is responsible for the record warmth. During the last 6 months, sea surface temperatures off the South American continent have been several degrees above normal, due to a reversal of winds which normally blow warm water west across the Pacific to Australasia. The El Niño ocean current can influence global patterns of weather considerably. Last year’s droughts and forest fires in Indonesia and Australia, and the mild weather experienced by the UK and Europe during January and February are believed to be phenomena of the warming in the Pacific. According to James Hansen of NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies, El Niño may have contributed as much as a 0.1
o
C increase to the global annual mean temperature during 1997.
In contrast, satellites which measure temperature in the lowest 8 kilometers of the Earth’s atmosphere continue to contradict the surface-based temperature data. Satellite data collected by the University of Alabama and NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center suggest that 1997 was only the 12th warmest year in an 18 year record. In addition, temperatures over the full 18 years reveal a slight cooling trend of 0.06
o
C per decade. Supporters of satellite temperature records point to the warming effects of urban “heat islands” which may over-emphasise the warming trend. However, in a recent analysis in the journal Climate Change (vol. 37), scientists from the University of Buenos Aires in Argentina have suggested that there may be a separate bias in urban surface data which could have the opposite effect to “urban heating” on the long term trends.
Source : Global Environmental Change Report, 16 and 30 January 1998.
ENVIRONMENT AGENCY PLANS TO REDUCE SO2 EMISSIONS FROM POWER STATIONS
The Environment Agency are proposing to bring the deadline forward for reducing sulphur dioxide emissions from power stations. The current target of 84% reduction in SO
2
emissions from coal and oil fired power stations relative to 1991, is to be met by 2005. However, the Environment Agency plan to bring this target forward by four years to 2001 in order to improve air quality in the UK.
The Environment Agency state that reductions in SO
2
emissions have been achieved as a result of increasing use of gas in power stations, flue gas desulphurisation (FGD) and the use of low-sulphur fuel. To achieve further reductions, the Environment Agency recommend that low-sulphur coal (with an average maximum sulphur content less than 1.2%) be used in all coal fired stations, except those fitted with FGD equipment. Together with the modernisation of aging coal and oil burning power stations, the Environment Agency suggest in this consultation document proposals that further reductions can be met.
For further details or a copy of the consultation paper, contact Brian Baker (Tel: +44 (0)171 664 6859, Fax: +44 (0)171 664 6919).
Sources : Environment Action, Feb/Mar. 1998, Issue 12; Air Quality Management, February 1998.
A QUIET ATLANTIC HURRICANE SEASON IN 1997
During the summer and autumn months, sea surface temperatures in the tropical Atlantic rise to the required 27
o
C Celsius to precipitate the birth of tropical storms and hurricanes. After active 1995 and 1996 Atlantic hurricane seasons, 1997 needed only to record a modest amount of storm activity to witness a three year record. Instead, 1997 turned out to be one of the weakest seasons for many decades, with only one tropical cyclone occurring during August and September, usually the most active period of the hurricane season. The reduced storm activity in the Atlantic during 1997 was most likely the result of the El Niño episode in the tropical Pacific. In contrast, hurricane activity in the North East Pacific increased markedly in response to El Niño.
Source : Outlook, Meteorological Office, January/February 1998.
CLEANER FUELS CAN CONTRIBUTE TO CLEANER AIR IN THE UK
A report commissioned by the National Society for Clean Air’s (NSCA) Cleaner Fuels Forum outlines that cleaner vehicle fuels such as low benzene petrol and ultra-low sulphur ‘city diesel’ can make a small but significant contribution to improving air quality in the UK.
The Cleaner Fuels Forum comprises of around 20 companies and organisations with interests in vehicle emissions, including NSCA, ARIC, Friends of the Earth, AA, Tesco, Sainsbury’s, Institute of Petroleum and Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders.
Clare Holman, author of the report suggests that cleaner fuels are likely to have greatest impact in pollution hotspots such as large city centres.
Clean brands of petrol and diesel that are already available include City Diesel available from 206 Sainsbury’s fuel stations countrywide and 50 Tesco stations in and around London and Tesco’s Low-Benzene unleaded petrol available at 105 filling stations countrywide. Most of these fuels are priced around 1p per litre above the price of unleaded petrol and diesel. Other fuels such as compressed natural gas (CNG) and liquified petroleum gas (LPG) are not yet widely available.
The report suggests that if the clean fuels already available were widely used, reductions of around 5% of nitrogen oxides and 15% particulates could be achieved.
Improving public awareness of cleaner fuels and their associated benefits was a key finding of the report. A survey by AA revealed for example, that 83% of c500 drivers interviewed had not heard of low sulphur diesel. Government, fuel suppliers, motor manufacturers and motoring organisations were encouraged to provide more information.
Copies of the report are available from NSCA, price £25 (Tel: 01273 326313). Summary reports are available free of charge from ARIC (see top of page 1 for contact details).
Sources:  Air Quality Management, February 1998; NSCA News Release, 4 Feb. 1998.
RAINFALL RISES DURING 20TH CENTURY
According to a report published in the Journal of Climate (vol. 10), rainfall over land areas has increased globally during the 20th century, particularly in the mid to high latitudes. Analysing data from over 5,000 stations worldwide, researchers at Columbia University in New York discovered a 22 mm increase in global annual rainfall since the turn of the century. An increase in rainfall would be an expected consequence of warmer temperatures as rates of evaporation from surface ocean water would be enhanced. Nevertheless, the large annual variability of rainfall, and the omission of data from large regions of the Earth (principally the oceans) makes it difficult to place a high degree of confidence in the reality of a truly global rise in rainfall.
Source:  Global Environmental Change Report, 16 January 1998.
SUMMERTIME SMOGS: GOOD AND BAD NEWS REVEALED
The incidences of peak levels of low-level ozone are decreasing, but average levels of ozone are increasing. A new report by the Photochemical Oxidants Review Group (PORG) published in January 1998, reveals that whilst peak levels of low-level ozone have decreased by 20% in the last 10 years, average levels are still increasing.
The report describes the National Air Quality Strategy standard of 50ppb for ozone as "challenging", suggesting that VOC and NOx emission reductions of a substantial nature will be required for these standards to be met.
The report Ozone in the UK : Fourth Report of the Photochemical Oxidants Review Group is available from Lucy Moore, DETR (Tel: +44 (0)171 890 3000) aric  .
Sources : Air Quality Management, February 1998; DETR News Release, 13 Jan. 1998.
DETR APPROVE &pound4.2m MONITORING EQUIPMENT FOR LOCAL AUTHORITIES
The Government have announced that &pound4.2m will be provided to 97 local authorities for the purchase of air pollution monitoring equipment. The money will be used to purchase the following quantities of monitoring kits; 100 PM10, 70 nitric oxide, 50 sulphur dioxide, 4 lead and 1 VOC.
Source : Air Quality Management, January 1998.
4TH SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT REPORT LAUNCHED
Last month, the British Government Panal on Sustainable Development launched its 4th report. The Panel met four times during 1997, and selected four major diverse topics for study: the impact of human activities on marine biodiversity; endocrine disrupting chemicals; the contribution of good architectural design and use of materials to sustainable living and working; and foresight and sustainable development. Furthermore, this latest report reviews recommendations put forward by the Panel in earlier reports, including items on environmental economics, environmental education, ozone depletion, biotechnology, forestry, climate change and air quality.
The report is published by the UK Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions.
