Avian flew
- The UK climate bill still omits the emissions from the aviation industry from its calculations - which makes the whole sum nonsensical.
UCS have just produced a facinating report on the proliferation of RPS's in the US. It's starting to look like, just maybe, a federal system would be easier than the current patchwork? I realise that you Americans loving using the states as 'labs' to test various policies...can we consider the RPS policy tested yet?
Writing vs Doing
It seems that recently i have been doing both a lot less writing and a lot more meeting, protesting, organising. I`m aware that this dosent translate well to this blog. I will still try and talk about key issues in climate change with whatever spare time i have.
This years big topic seems to be high food prices. This is a vital topic and I'm keen to have in covered in depth at this years Camp for Climate Action. I will be doing a post on this at the next possible opportunity.
Global Food Crisis: Review (podcasts, songs, reports, articles)
The story of the year has to be rising food prices.  The details are complex , so beware anyone who gives you a simple explanation. There are both demand and supply side factors--both of which are explained by Lester Brown in this interview (mp3). On the demand side a rapidly growing middle class is moving from grains to the more typical diet of the affluent; meat and vegetables complimented by grains . If you eat any of the various kinds of grain you get a large amount of energy from your food; to get the same amount of energy by eating meat, you have to feed the animal that provides that meat with a larger amount of grain. For example to get one calorie from a cow you need to feed it 6 calories in the form of grain. A second major demand side force is an ever growing global population .
Thirdly, the rapid expansion of biofuels, perticularly for US and European markets is an emerging source of demand. The worlds few hundered million motorists are being pitted against the world billion of poor.
"From 1990 through 2005 the growth in grain consumption was around
20'000'000 tones a year, in the last two years...it has jumped to
around 50'000'000 tonnes a year, the difference being roughly 30'000'000 tonnes
per year of additional grain being used to produce ethanol...stated otherwise,
the growth in world demand for grain these last two years from US ethanol
destileries exceedes the world growth in demand from all other
sources"
Lester Brown, Earth Policy Institute
On the supply side there are both short term issues such as bad weather in some parts of thw world, and long term issues such as loss of soil qaulity, water table depletion, crop damage due to climate change and shifitng agricultural regions also due to climate change . The relative importance of these factors, now and into the future is very difficult to predict although it is likely that they are all leading in one direction; towards agricultural stress.
The impact of increasing food prices is significant even in the developed world where inflation is not fully reflecting the increasing cost of living for the poor. As staple foods are not optional purchases, rises in these costs are therefore perticularly important for the the most vulnerable in society. In the developing world things are very tough , there have been reports of 'rice rustling' (Thailand), grain truck hijacking (Darfur), strikes over wage stagnation (Bangladesh); and riots in many countries around the world including Egypt, Yemen, Cameroon, Mexico and others . Many of these countries are poor but developing, the problems are even more extreme for refugees and those being fed by the World Food Program which has a limited budget.
"The doubling of world wheat, rice, and corn prices has sharply reduced the
availability of food aid, putting the 37 countries that depend on the WFP’s
emergency food assistance at risk. In March, the WFP issued an urgent appeal for
$500 million of additional funds."
Celsias
Thankfully, as is apparent from the above, we have plenty of food. If we are currentl deciding to burn large qauntities of it as fuel then we have a nother option, which is highly complex and involves not being complete bastards i.e stop burning food. The other major way that we can solve the problem is by eating less meat; from an environmental point of view the whole topic of vegetarianism is more problematic than helpful. Vegetarianism seems to have its own culture; we dont need people to accept an ethos to solve this problem, mearly to encourage healthier diets with a lower proportion of meat. It is also worth noting that whilst such a move is worthwhile, in general markets do respond well to price signals, and currently meet production is hugely subsidised in the US and Europe (hence 'cash cow'). Perhaps damaging ethanol and meet subsdies should be removed as a first step to resolving this problem. For less obvious and more detailed solutions check out this IIASTD report or briefing .
Related Audio:
Global Climate Campaign Newsletter: Dec 6th 2008 Preperation
The Global Climate Campaign is the name of a project initiated by Campaign against Climate Change . The focus of this campaign is an International Day of Climate Action that is planned to coincide with the annual UN climate talks. One reason for it's success is the broad nature of the coallition building that has been carried out; the general message has been if you support a global and leaglly binding climate change deal then join us on this day and be part of something bigger than any of our individual efforts.
The campaign now has a well produced newsletter with some facinating contributions ( PDF )
The Global Climate Campaign is a growing movement with representation in many, many countries, but perhaps not yours? If you would like to add your group to the list of those supporting the call bellow then email the campaign office via the website:
"We demand that world leaders take the urgent and resolute action that
is needed to prevent the catastrophic destabilisation of global climate, so that
the entire world can move as rapidly as possible to a stronger emissions
reductions treaty which is both equitable and effective in preventing dangerous
climate change.
emitted most greenhouse gases up to now take most of the responsibility for the
adaptive measures that have to be taken, especially by low-emitting countries
with limited economic resources."
National Climate Camp Meeting: London 10th-11th May
On Tuesday Friends of the Earth and Stop Climate Chaos held a public meeting at Friends Meeting House on Euston Road. A large crown turned out to hear Environment Secretary Hillary Benn and Environment spokesmen for both the Lib-Dem's and Tories talk about there position on the Climate Bill which has just passed the House of Lords  and is heading back to the Commons.
Hillary seemed reasonable if not visionary; thats a shame really becuase we need a visionary to deal with an urgen challenge rather than a large problem. Jo Abess has written a review of the proceedings over at her climate college . The main reason for mentioning this event, wasnt to highlight the great work that FOE are doing, but to share my experiance of leafleting at the event. I was there to highlight the next national organisational meeting for the Climate Camp.  There was a lot of support for this despite the numerous campaigns that had congregated to reach others concerned about climate change. There was just one attitutde that bothered me, people expected that the climate camp would exist and that they could just turn up for the week. This is not a f%7("~g festival! It dosent just appear, it is created by all those who come together to make it happen;  it is a free event with donattions for some services requested, the real price of addmitance is involvement!
At the national organizational meeting  we will have job shops, and working groups lists so that everyone can find something big or small to suite there schedule. But i think everyone should expect to contribute something to the camp, weather that be helping with the website, spreading the word, organising workshops, finding the structures or the pumbing equipment. There are committed people who will put on this event at some scale, but if it is to grow then everyone has to know that participation is required.
Climate Change Groups in London
Having moved from not that near Aberdeen to the edge of London my options of getting practically involved in climate change related activities have increased dramatically. The new issue is priorities.
I am strongly supportive of the work being carried out by many groups such as Campaign against Climate Change, Friends of the Earth, Greenpeace, Rising Tide, Plane Stupid, The Camp for Climate Action, HACAN and the Campaign against Urban 4*4's. In fact i have recently been along to events by many of these groups.
Living just outside the centre of London however means added transport costs and time for every event attended so despite knowing people and enjoying the social side of these groups i`m going to focus on the work of the Climate Camp. I'm also going to stay involved with anti-Heathrow events as this is an issue with a lot of local support. Finally, i`m still keen to get involved with Plane Stupid. I think that two groups with regular commitments, and occasional support to the anti-aviation campaigns is a manageable level of commitment.
I`m also thinking about creating my own campaign which will not be ostensibly environmental but rather will focus on broas economic and social questions that are of concern to most citizens. We all know that climate change isn't a top tear issue for many people; well it is possible to move the mountain to mohammed. In other words we can find a lot of smart policies to address that both fight climate change and improve peoples lives in a way that enables an openness and generosity required for support of climate change policies. I want to develop this in some detail and possibly build the group at a the Cimate Camp .
Time Magazine Cover Goes Green
When time magazine first did a climate change front page with a lonely polar bear on thin ice, it was clear to all that the debate on the reality of climate change was coming  to an end in the US. Indeed this is not a debate that the US presidential candidates would have.
In this new political atmosphere the media is moving ahead with the discussion, focusing on the possibility of green collar jobs and a weak US economy and on the potential of lower oil imports by ramping  up renewables .
This week Time Magazine has a special report "Green is the New Red White and Blue" :
Chevron's Amazon Abu Ghuraib
Chevron have been waging a (farsical) PR war against environmental heroes who recently won the Goldman Prize for protecting the environment. Fight back !
Chevron Corp (CVX.N: Quote, Profile, Research)
Video Description:
The largest oil-related environmental disaster in the world - Chevron dumped over 18 billion gallons of toxic wastewater in the Ecuadorian Amazon. Now they are trying to hide their disaster and launching public relations campaigns about "human energy". The truth is Chevron's actions cause death, cancer, birth defects, miscarriages and the worst oil related destruction of the Amazon. They damage is estimate at up to $16billion. Chevron can't hide its actions any longer and should pay up. Visit www.chevrontoxico.com to learn more and take action!
Chevron destroy Ecuadorian rainforest then kick up fuss when forest protectors are recognised.
Chevron is a big bad oil company operating in the neo-liberal global trade climate of the 21st century. Multinationals can currently get away with a lot; globalisation of capital has outstripped globalisation of government and regulation. Raping the planet is all part of the game, not doing so would be bad business unless the laws prevent it, or you can place compliance as a PR cost.
So I don't hold multinational shareholder return driven, massively unregulated, corporations to high ethical standards. However, when people win awards for to resisting the treatment dished out to them and their lands i would have expected an act of contrition. In fact the Chevron response is character assassination of the activists.
"the only thing green they are interested in is money."
Congratulations to lawyer Pablo Fajardo Mendoza and community organizer Luis Yanza for their joint award of the Goldman Environment Prize. And shame on the SF Chronicle for stating that Chevron denunciations count as controversy! Clearly Chevron are going to resist any further evidence of their deeds, particularly as they are being sued by the Ecuadorean government.
Global Climate Movement: 350.org
Bill McKibben, prominant green author, and superstar activist worked with students at Middlebury to create the phenominally successful StepItUp campaign.
Now his project has gone global with 350.org ; the 350 refers to 350ppm CO2e , a concentration of greenhouse gasses significantly lower than most policy wonks are talking about but a level at which we may have to stabilise concentrations to prevent run-away climate change.
The project differs from the Global Climate Campaign (GCC) in having a very specific outcome and a more significant central organisation; this greater specificity and centrality will no doubt enable certain activities and engage certain new people not already reached. The more ad hoc  GCC however, worked as a de facto umbrella group and the day international day of climate action, a simple unifying element.
It will be interesting to see how these two activist elements work together to raise the profile and increase the cohesiveness of the global climate change protest movement.
Al Gore at TED 2008
Al Gore Talks at TED: Not as funny as last year but deeply earnest and determined. Artifice, a scam, I dont see how you could possibly think so after seeing Al wear his heart on his sleave in this video.
Greenpeace, HACAN, Campaign against Climate Change, 2M, NOTRAG...
All these groups, and many people will be making a stand against airport expansion, not just at heathrow but within the UK as a whole.
Come, join us, make some noise, on MAY 31st!
Pt 1 - Welcome and Introduction. (length 48:09)
H. Vincent Poor, Dean, School of Engineering and Applied Science, and Michael Henry Strater University Professor of Electrical Engineering, Princeton University
Charles M. Vest, President, National Academy of Engineering, and President Emeritus of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Robert Socolow, Professor of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Princeton University: Living in a Greenhouse with the Help of Stabilization Wedges
Pt 2 - Interconnections between Air Pollution, Climate Change and Health (length 34:55)
Denise Mauzerall, Associate Professor of Public and International Affairs, Woodrow Wilson School, Princeton University
Pt 3 - Carboholics: The Power Industry and Global Warming (length 49:43)
David Crane, CEO, NRG Energy
Pt 4 - Sustaining African Landscapes: Fostering Conservation and Development through Science and Engineering (length 39:16)
Daniel Rubenstein, Professor and Chair, Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Princeton University
Pt 5 - How much technology do we need to solve the climate problem? (length 43:42)
Stephen Pacala, Fredrick Petrie Professor in Ecology and Evolutionary Biology and Director, Princeton Environmental Institute, Princeton University
April Biofool's Day is fast approaching!
From this Tuesday (15th April) all UK forecourts will be required by law to sell only fuel which is blended with 2.5% biofuel. This will have devastating consequences on climate, carbon sinks, food prices and human rights, with people being violently evicted from their land. EU targets are set to increase to 10% by 2020.
"The grain required to fill a 25-gallon SUV gas tank with ethanol will feed
one person for a year "
Lester Brown, Earth Policy Institute
Please come and join to protest against biofuels and the new law (the RTFO). There will be protests all around the UK on the same day!
Tuesday 15th April
BP station in Bruntsfield (BP are big investors in biofuels).
If you like, dress as a tree to be deforested or an April (bio)fool! Bring along drums and instruments. Please contact me if you want to discuss any of this or you would like an information sheet of key messages to get across.
Hope to see you on Tuesday,  Julia : 07846939059
What's wrong with agrofuels (biofuels)?
Deforestation, peatland destruction and nitrogen fertiliser use mean that agrofuels are actually worse for the climate than fossil fuel. Paul Crutzen (nobel prize-winner) suggests that rapeseed biodiesel is up to 70% worse for climate change than ordinary fossil diesel (even though it's grown in the UK so involves no deforestation or peatland destruction) due to nitrous oxide emissions from nitrogen fertiliser which is a 300x more damaging greenhouse gas than CO2.
In the global South people are being evicted from their lands to make way for agrofuel plantations, often violently with deaths and human rights abuses taking place. In Argentina 200,000 families and in Paraguay 100,000 families have been evicted due to soya expansion. These are just 2 examples but this is happening on a wide scale in South-east Asia, India, Tanzania, Ethiopia, Colombia and the list goes on.
Food prices are soaring as a result of agrofuels. According to Jean Ziegler (until recently the UN special rapporteur on the right to food) there are 12 million more people going hungry now than a year ago due to rising food prices, something which agrofuels are a big contributer to.
Instead we need to dramatically reduce fossil fuel use, live more locally and improve public transport.
For more info on biofuels visit: www.biofuelwatch.org.uk
New Institute for Policy Studies Report: "World Bank: Climate Profiteer"
Stephen Colbert famously claimed at a whitehouse dinner for the press corp that 'facts have a well known liberal bias'. On that basis the IPS is a liberal thinktank  but in reality as notable by the funding levels, the IPS isn't an instrument for funding policy for the wealthy elite who simply differ in views from conservatives, unlike some thinktanks there isn't much corporate funding to be seen.
IPS have just released a report into the World Banks involvement in carbon markets.  It's a bit of an odd one really, they are both funding the most polluting and destructive practices around, and projects to reduce the level of carbon. They proffit handsomely in the latter!
“World Bank: Climate Profiteer,” a new report from the Institute for Policy
Studies, shows how the World Bank’s growing engagement in carbon markets is
dangerously counter-productive. The Bank’s $2 billion, and growing, carbon
finance portfolio is forging a path through the $60 billion international carbon
market toward a dirty energy future. And while the World Bank continues to fund
greenhouse gas-emitting coal, oil and gas projects, it skims an average 13% off
the top of carbon deals. That means an estimated $260 million in the Bank’s
pocket. The report recommends that the Bank get out of the carbon markets, stop
fossil fuel financing, and begin to calculate its own significant impact on the
global climate.
New Coal: It's Just Not the Done Thing
Lester Brown (Plan B; 1.0. 2.0, 3.0) has an interesting article doing the rounds in the green blogosphere in which he outlines the tough year that coal has had in the US. The same will be true if it tries some kind of resurgence here in the UK. I`m certainly going to do what i can in resisting such an appauling idea. The progress made so far in the US, if it holds, could set a major precident for coal in the developed world; and moves the whole world towards a situations where coal without ccs comes to be seen in the right manner, namely hugely irresponsible, and just not something that is the done thing. We will have to set this example and help provide alternatives in the growing Asian giants are to avoid this environmentally costly and dangerously polluting form of power.
A cross posting of climate change actions and events from Rising Tide:
Want to brush direct action skills? Want a direct action training for your
group? Need a trainer or help in organising it? Want to advertise it to
lots of people? Get in touch with training at networkforclimateaction.org.uk
and we can put you in touch with experienced activists who are happy
to provide training. We can also put up info about upcoming trainings.
There will be nationwide protests, including one outside Downing Street,
London at 6pm, organised by Biofuelwatch and the Campaign Against Climate
Change. Please contact info at biofuelwatch.org.uk if you are organising a
local event and would like it advertised, or if you would like any further
information.
"Climate Action Movement Building"
Are you involved in local climate action or would you like to be? Climate
Chaos is getting real and we need to act now - You are invited to a day of
networking, skill-sharing and organising! How is the movement doing? How
does it best move forwards? Donation of £2-3 towards the cost of the room.
Please contact if you are planning to attend and if you need
accommodation, so they can get an idea of numbers. Email;
contact at networkforclimateaction.org.uk
Refuse to Pay: Take Action Against Soaring Train Prices
We are urging people to board trains into the central London terminals and
converge at around 1pm, having refused to pay for the overpriced tickets.
You do not have to be a student to take part in this action, and all are
encouraged to join in. As well as tackling public transport head on, it
also offers a positive example of how people can take empowering direct
action against climate change.
E.ON is building the new coal power station at Kingsnorth in Kent. The
protest will be at its national headquarters, which are in the Westwood
Business Park next to Warwick University. For more info go to:
Exhibition runs until the end of April at The Old Mercedes Showroom,
opposite Camden Arts Centre, 341 Finchley Road, NW3 6ET. No entry after
midnight.
‘I BIKE MCR’ FESTIVAL - MANCHESTER, APRIL 2008
‘I Bike MCR ‘is a grassroots festival organised voluntarily by a group of
cyclists that want to promote cycling and bike related activities no
matter how crazy they may seem! See;
1st May 2008 - A Day of Climate Action, everywhere!
As climate change rises up the political agenda, a huge number of
techno-fixes are forming a new economic sector: from biofuels to nuclear
power, carbon trading to hydrogen fuel cells, dumping urine in the ocean
to carbon capture and storage. Everywhere corporations are seeking the
elusive elixir which allows us to continue business as usual. All of these
technologies are a distraction from the real solution to the problems we
face: a massive reduction in our consumption and the end to economic
growth. On May 1st, International Workers Day, let’s challenge these false
solutions to climate chaos and show the real solution: far-reaching social
change, and reduction in consumption.
http://www.daysofclimateaction.org.uk/mayday.html
The food we eat contributes up to a third of the emissions poisoning the
planet. It's time for a detox! Local organic food, growing your own,
veganism, permaculture, food security, humanitarian issues, agrofuels,
transport campaigning, GM food ... make the links on climate change ...
take action on the 3rd of June toward a low-carbon diet!
(Please note change of date to that previously announced)
Join a Spring Carnival of Resistance to Airport Expansion! We can stop a
third runway at Heathrow and the runaway growth in aviation! Tell the
government to get real on climate change and prevent a climate
catastrophe! Start time 12 noon. Probable assembly point Hatton Cross
(tube). There will be a carnival-style march to a festival-style event at
Sipson village. More details;
You are invited to Kingsnorth coal-fired Power Station, Kent, UK, for 9
days of Low-impact living and education / High-impact direct action!
Late July: Heathrow event and travel to Kingsnorth. Details soon...
Sunday August 3th: Camp set up - we'll all make the camp happen together.
Monday August 4th-10th: Workshops, networking and action training.
Wednesday August 6th: Day of Action against Agrofuels!
Saturday August 9th: Day of Mass Action against Kingsnorth!
Monday August 11th: Help return the camping field back to nature.
See you there!
Worldwatch Institute points to rapidly growing wind power industry.
According to the Worldwatch Institute Windpower continues is rapid rise in prominance. Last year wind was second only to gas new installed capacity for the US and was the most installed new source of energy in the EU.
Global wind power capacity reached 94,100 megawatts by the end of 2007, up
27 percent from the previous year, and then topped 100,000 megawatts by April
2008.  1  (See Figure 1.) The roughly 20,000 megawatts installed in
2007 was 31 percent above the 2006 record for capacity additions.
The wind power sector offers a great example of economic growth and environmental protection going hand in hand.
The global wind market was estimated to be worth about $36 billion in 2007,
accounting for nearly half of all investments in new renewable power and heating
capacity last year.  38  As many as 200,000 people around the world are currently employed by  the wind industry.  39  These numbers will only rise in coming years.
Porche: Carbon Dinosaurs
Porche are suing the Mayor of London, Ken Livingston, for imposing a higher congestion charge on polluting vehicles. In the process of this Urban Dinosaur hunt we had quite a few positive comments and no antagonism. We where there for some time and i only noticed one potential customer taking a look through the windows. Interestingly, one investor (we where in a very pricy area of London) stated that ii am very right wing' but just couldnt understand why the govornment hadent introduced 75MPG requirements as 'we have the technology'. It's a funny old world.
Mole Discovered in Anti-Aviation Group 'Plane Stupid'
It seems that the Aviation industry has been so keen to learn about the intentions of anti-aviation group Plane Stupid that they hired a security company to send in a spy!
A spokesman for the group said: “This special agent was more Austin Powers
than James Bond, though the question still remains, who paid for the spy?”
This story is well covered on the Plane Stupid website as well as being picked up by The Times . More on the politics of aviation expansion in a recent New Statesman .
On Saturday the 5th April Campaign against Climate Change staged a photo opportunity outside parliament. We went along with giant prop loophole and model jumbo jet to make our point; aviation is flying through the climate bill, leaving a tattered rag where a serious climate bill used to be. In fact it is both Aviation and Shipping.
New Radio Ecoshock interviews hot off the recording decks.
Alex Smith over at Radio Ecoshock produces a continuous stream of good climate change related discussions and interviews; so head on over and check out the extensive archives  .
The latest shows that Alex has just informed me about cover:
The state of current climate science as compared to the latest IPCC 4AR. ( MP3 )
The denial tactics used by the fossil fuel industry, a talk by Ross Gelbspan.( MP3 )
Tim Flannery talking about the sort of problem that climate change represents and some insperation for solutions from the past.( MP3 )
Price of Rice on the Rise
There are many reasons for the price of rice going up  .  Of course all grain prices are linked to varying degrees so this is part of a wider problem in agricultural production. The most often quoted drivers of increasing prices are the rise of asia up the economic scale, leading to more meat consumption, and more grain required to feed the animals grown for food; the rise of bofuels, perticularly of corn ethanol in the US is also a significant factor.
Other factors such as soil degredation, decline of water qaulity and the effects of climate change on global agriculture through shifting weather patterns and drought, are all likely to add to these pressures in the medium to long term.
If you live in the US then you will be aware of the pressure being exerted on China to unpin its currency. One of the main reasons they dont do this is that they need to subsidise food for the hundereds of millions of extremely impoverished Chineese who are not currently bennefiting from national accension.
Foolish about Biofuels.
Rising Tide, and several other groups got together on April Fools day to rebrand it Fossil Fools Day, and a whole range of foolish construction projects and policies where highlighted. Well, in the dash away from fossil fuels, one possible option has been latched onto as a way of maintining hypermobility; biofuels.
With widespread deforestation being drivin by demand for biofuel crops, this is starting to look like a bad idea!
On 15th April Bio-Fools day is being launched with a protest at Downing street at 6pm , this date was chosen as it is the launch of the Renewable Transport Fuel Obligation (RTFO), and environmetal policy that stands a good chance of doing worse than breaking even on environmental criteria!
"The RTFO will mean that all petrol and diesel must contain a minimum percentage of ‘biofuel’. This will drastically increase the demand for ‘biofuels’ or ‘agrofuels’, that is fuels that are made from living plants (rather than the “fossilised” ones that make up oil and coal). The theory is that because these fuels absorb as much CO2 when they grow, as they emit when they are burnt, they are basically ‘carbon neutral’. Now, ‘biofuels’ made from waste materials like used chip fat are fine…. but these could only ever supply a fraction of the demand if we use biofuels to replace any significant proportion of the transport fuel that now comes from fossil fuels. To do this requires growing crops for fuel (eg rapeseed, palm oil, soy, sugar cane or jatropha) on a massive scale (this is why we use the term “agrofuels”).
This increases the pressure on land and in places like Brazil and Indonesia this increases the pressure on the rain forest and other surviving biodiverse ecosystems. Clearance for palm oil plantations is now the biggest driver behind deforestation in Indonesia and an increase in the price of soy (caused by increased demand) is seen as the main cause of the recent huge increase in the rate of deforestation in Brazil. Even if agrofuels are produced from, say, “certifiably sustainable” rapeseed in Europe this can have knock-on effects – it means there is less rapeseed available to produce cooking oils and foodstuffs and this results in a massively increased demand for Indonesian palm oil to fill the gap."
More on biofuels here .
When the draft climate bill came out i stated that it had a loophole big enough to fly a 747 through. Well, that is the theme of a protest at 10 Downing Street this Saturday 5th April at 2pm. This might seem more technical than 'no third runway' but if aviation is included in the bill; and every sane person agrees that this is logical, then we will have a lot less flights to worry about. This ammendment is both key and counter to the direction that labour has seemed to be going. Lets make them pay for this failure, and hope for a change of course.
Heathrow Protest: May 31st
Last week I attended a flash mob at the oppening of Heathrow's terminal 5. This was slightly overshaddowed by the complete #u@=  up that BA have made of handelling baggage. However, it is part of a sustained campaign against the runway. The next event that i am aware of is on May 31st. Untill then enjoy some photos from the flash mob...
Fossil Foolie award to Exxon Mobil (NYSE:XOM)
Members of Billionaires for Big Oil attempt to award VP of Exxon Mobil with a fossil follie award for his outstanding achievents in proffiting of the poor, funding the wealthy, destroying the planet, and generally being a superb billionaire!
ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) are one company that is heavily invested in the past and blind to the future. What complete fossil fools!
Al Gore is all over the news again, and as far as i`m concerned thats a good thing. This time it is his project known as the Alliance for Climate Protection that is making the news for it's big money ad campaign to build momentum behind action on climate change.
Andrew Revkin explains the program far better than i could so head on over to the NYT dot.earth blog for more.
A couple of key points include the Launch of the campaign on '60 Minutes' and the fact that the adverts will include unnusuall pairings of people saying 'we dont agree on much, but on this one thing we agree, the need to protect our planet'. The first announcement that i have seen stars Al Sharpton and Pat Robinson. A civil rights campaigner come politician, siting with the highly concervative televangelist.  Al gore on '60 Minutes':
Cathy Zoi who is heading up the Alliance for Climate Protection is a former Clinton administration aide on enviornmental issues. She spoke to the aspen institute about the urgency of the issue and the Alliance's plans at a forum last week (  part 1  , part 2  ).  This was a facinating forum, judging by the speakers, who, incidentely included Andrew Revkin...perhaps explaining how he wrote such an informative article. Videos from the forum here .
Fossil Fools called out in events across the uk.
I posted the text of a flyer that i helped to write a couple of days back targeting E-ON's sponsorship of the FA CUP. Now that event has been and went, and many others where organised for the same time, fossil fools day.
Events in London included:
The aforementioned event at FA headqauters drawing attention to the sponsorship of our national game by coal power promoter E-ON...not a very healthy choice of sponsor. This was an action by London Rising Tide.
The construction of a model coal plant complete with 12ft cooling towers at the Houses of Parliament.
A faux-appology by Porche for persuing a lawsuit against Ken Livingston for the congestion charge.
Anti-Coal Websites
Green Radio
Energy
Non-Western Perspectives
Updates
