Advertisement
Arctic ice is thinner than ever according to new evidence from explorers
Sea ice in the North Pole is even thinner than had been feared, according to    results from the first ever expedition on foot to find out the affects of    climate change on the Arctic.
Published: 4:37PM BST 17 Apr 2009
Catlin Arctic Survey: Pen Hadow drilling to measure ice thickness  Photo: BARCROFT
In the first half of a 620 mile journey to the Pole, the Catlin Arctic Survey led by Pen Hadow has reported that ice formed within the past year had an average thickness of 1.77m.
A lack of thicker ice suggests that ice formed more than a year ago has either moved to a different part of the ocean or  melted away meaning the ice cover will be even further reduced this summer.
The findings come as Nasa warned that sea ice cover over the Arctic reached its lowest volume since records began this year, with the possibility of an ice-free summer as early as 2013.
The four-man expedition are trekking to the North Pole over 100 days in order to calibrate the satellite observations of the shrinking ice cap with evidence from the ground.
Forty-seven days into the trek, the British team have spotted their first Polar bear tracks and evidence of an Arctic fox and are able to trek for longer because of more hours of daylight.
However, temperatures are still at -40 degrees Fahrenheit (-40 degrees Celsius) or below and as a result many of the high-tech tools, including equipment to monitor the health of the explorers remotely from London, has failed.
As a consequence the team is having to rely on the relatively "old fashioned" ice drill to do the scientific monitoring. Mr Hadow spends up to four hours every day drilling through the ice at up to ten sites and then taking measurements of the thickness of the ice and snow, salinity and other critical information.
So far the thickest measurements has been 3.75 metres but most are around half that. First year ice is generally thinner than 2 metres and older multiyear ice is generally thicker than 3 metres.
Mr Hadow, who was the first man to trek solo to the Pole, said he was surprised to find such thin ice at this stage in the trek. He explained that the route had been chosen, in conjunction with scientific advisers, to cover an area where there would be thicker ice.
Speaking on satellite phone from the team's latest floating camp out on the ice, he said: "To discover that there's virtually no multiyear in this part of the journey is a real surprise to me. I am really interested to know what the scientists make of it."
The result of the expedition will be fed to scientists in time for a UN meeting in December where the world will decide a new agreement to tackle climate change.
Advertisement
MORE FROM TELEGRAPH.CO.UK
