Featuring Customized Search and News Feed of Reviewed, Authoritative Content
Can America Lead World to a Carbon Free Future?
Thankfully in our constant climate news tracking we are noting less debate about climate change's existence and proposing of dangerous half-measures, and more scientists, citizens and policy-makers proposing dramatic efforts to cut emissions as fast and as much as possible. For example in a recent speech Al Gore made brave and substantive proposals [ more ] for an immediate freeze on carbon dioxide emissions and elimination of payroll taxes in favor of pollution taxes - both are not politically easy, but are imaginative and at the scale required to solve the problem. And a Stanford University conference notes that humanity has 500 to 1000 years of fossil fuel, mostly coal, that could be burned. "China alone is building the equivalent of a Manhattan every year and a large coal-fired power plant every week." They propose moving to a "massively carbonless" future by 2050 through increased energy efficiency and massive renewable energy developments. It is vital that these and other measures that are sufficient to actually address and solve the climate crisis are carefully debated, developed and implemented now.
Posted by Dr. Glen Barry on September 19, 2006  7:07 AM  | More on climate change solutions proposals
Comments
Re: Before, after and the next 9/11 …
As a young man, growing up in Siberia setting fires on thawing permafrost was a favorite past-time. Then, little did I know, these flames were burning methane and I had stumbled on to a contribution to Global Warming, an indication of how the world could end.
In the U.S., I joined the Preventech Foundation the developers of technologies preventing Global Warming.
We submitted these technologies to the authorities, but received no response. Finally, the article in Fresno Bee by Seth Borenstein AP (09/07/06) might convince the Public, that there is no escape from Global Warming. So, we have submitted this technology again! As you may have guessed – no response! History repeats itself – for example, the technology of ‘motioncodes’ which would makes the 9/11 terrorists attack impossible, was submitted one year before 9/11, but again no response!
Actually the scientists receive an automatic electronic form letter, saying “Thank you, we would contact you” – but they never did. Preventive technologies were submitted by different groups of scientists independently from different parts of the world. Ignoring modern technology is the reason why 9/11 did happened.
It appears that the U.S. may not necessarily be destroyed by environmental disaster or by terrorists. Americans could destroy themselves! The mystery – why have Americans decided to self-destruct?
This time we are appealing directly to all citizens. We are looking for a producer to make the multimedia phenomena ‘THE END OF THE LAST EMPIRE’ movie. It would demonstrate technology preventing the END.
The ‘all-in-one’ – drama, horror, suspense and education tool for children, teaching that crime and terrorism will no longer be possible. To avoid the shock and sensationalism the movie will be released as ‘science fiction.’ Once the movie is released, this preventive technology would become every day commodity. Please request for Motion Science Memorandum – the listing of preventive motion devices and systems.
Dr. Edward Romanoff
please give me ur information for my task about global warming.
2 donnycarney rd
It is generally acknowledged that the solutions offered to counter climate change are woefully inadequate. We  might just begin to seriously address climate change by decreasing "consumption". This can be realistically implemented first in the developed democracies of the West. As consumption in the West accounts for  most of the world consumption of manufactured products and services, an effective policy of reducing consumption is to introduce birth control with a target of, say halfing the the Western countries' poulation by 2080. By doing so, we would have seriously decreased carbon emmisssion to a scale which might just be sufficient to avert the looming crisis. Such a radical but realistic policy coupled with gradual boycot of the products of high poluting companies - starting  with Western companies which have shifted their production to India, China and other developing SE Asian countries, where they can polute at will - will send a strong and effective message that the high consumer society will only consume clean energy products. It will also force policy makers in these developing regions to adopt similar polices if they are to attract the hard currency which they so badly need and stay in the global market.
may i ask Global leaders to save siachen and other himalayan Glaciers..
please look at the story Exchange Siachen confrontation for peace
Q. Isa Daudpota and Arshad H. Abbasi
Opinion-makers in India and Pakistan should tell their governments to stop ruining the future of our water supplies and our weather system. Bringing the troops down from Siachen would be the first step.
BACK IN 2003, one of us (Daudpota) signed an email petition titled the Siachen Peace Park Initiative located at the glacier that bears this name. It had to do with getting India and Pakistan to withdraw from the futile conflict in the mountains and to let nature revert to its snowy tranquillity. "As part of the normalisation process/confidence-building measures, the governments of India and Pakistan are urged to establish a Siachen Peace Park to protect and restore the spectacular landscapes which are home to so many endangered species including the snow leopard." This was the statement adopted as a lead-up to the 5th World Parks Congress held in September 2003 in Durban, South Africa.
The petition was a follow-up to win widespread support for the idea from citizens of India, Pakistan, and around the world, so that the Indian and Pakistani Governments could move forward without loss of face, or strategic liability. Sadly there has been no progress in resolving this decades-old dispute.
But new strongly worded reports from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) released on February 2 this year could perhaps make the decision-makers change their minds about this wasteful, futile conflict. The IPCC forecasts that global temperatures would rise by 1.8 degrees Celsius to 4 degrees Celsius this century. There are already signs that South Asia will be one of the worst affected regions — the monsoon could be affected with reduced agriculture production, the sinking of island communities is likely, and vector-borne diseases could increase.
Here, however, we will mainly consider the impact of human presence and war on the glaciers of this region and the impact of this on the region and globally. Note that melting of the Himalayan glaciers contributes about 25 per cent to the sea-rise globally.
Serious consequence
A serious unforeseen consequence of the Siachen war is the danger posed to four other glaciers: Gangotri, Miyar, Milan, and Janapa, which feed the Ganga (first two glaciers), Chenab, and Sutlej rivers respectively. This is because of the heavy traffic on the Indian road from the plains to Siachen passing near these glaciers on the Delhi-Manali-Leh route. This finding is corroborated by a recent report by one of us (Abbasi) for the Worldwide Fund for Nature (WWF), available at http://tinyurl.com/23b5de.
According to M.N. Kaul, Principal Investigator on glaciology in the Indian Department of Science and Technology, "the ecology, the environment, and the health of the glacier can be under severe threat in case the Baltal route to the holy Amarnath cave was frequented by thousands of pilgrims." Professor Kaul said heavy pilgrim traffic besides mountain expeditions resulted in depletion of glacier and environmental degradation. He explained that "this depletion and degradation are the result of human breath, refuse and land erosion." When pilgrims can cause so much damage to the glaciers, imagine what the continual presence of troops from both countries must do to the ice and snow given their high-energy requirement.
Science bureaucrats who wish to be totally "objective" can often be very conservative in their assessment of complex phenomena that require immediate attention and action. Often a watertight assessment is not feasible and decisions ought to be based on the "precaution principle."
Unlike Professor Kaul, Rajendra Pachauri, director-general of the Energy and Resources Institute, is quoted as saying: "A number of scientists say Siachen should be made a protected area, a heritage site of sorts, and that there should be no army presence on either side. For purely ecological reasons, this might be a good idea. But I don't see why there would be melting as a result of military presence and activity."
But Professor Pachauri holds an even more important position as chairman of the IPCC. Launching the finding of the international report on February 2, he strongly emphasised the danger if no action was taken on reducing greenhouse emissions, which, among other things, melt glaciers. Research about the Gangotri, India's largest glacier — which feeds the Ganga — has found that the rate of retreat has almost doubled to 34 metres a year compared to what it was in 1971. The melting of Himalayan glaciers could have serious consequences as more than 500 million residents of the Indus, Ganga, and Brahmaputra river basins rely on them for water supply.
As with Gangotri, so with Siachen the increasing melting can be largely attributed to human activities in these areas. In Siachen, which provides water to the Nubra river, a tributary of the Indus, the ecosystem has been hugely disturbed by the presence of nearly 15,000 troops on its two sides, consuming and defecating, soiling the area and littering it with the remains of war. Much of this debris will flow into the Indus as the glacier melts.
India airlifts food and vital supplies to supplement material that goes up on an all-weather road. Fuel needed for cooking and keeping warm is provided by India through a 250-km-long pipeline. Vehicular traffic and the heat generated from the activities on this 21,000-foot-high glacier has led to unprecedented melting and diminishing of this 72-km-long glacier. Currently temperature rise in the area is recorded as 0.2 degrees Celsius annually, resulting in destructive snow avalanches, formation of glacial lakes, and snow holes.
Note that Pakistani troops lie on the western side of the Saltoro ridge, which essentially runs north-south, while Indians are on the eastern side. This is where the Siachen glacier is. Due to much lower activity on the Pakistani side the western glaciers are stable, as shown by recent independent studies by researchers from the U.K. and Italy.
Unfortunately, climate "experts" in Pakistan seem to lack knowledge of the importance of glaciers for our ecosystem. In 2001, some of them associated with the Global Climate Change Impact Studies Centre in Islamabad suggested that glaciers be melted artificially (by lasers or darkening) to alleviate the drought in the plains! This Centre was set up by old hands of the Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission. It took one of their own colleagues, Khalid Rashid, to debunk in a conference paper their suggestions, which he labelled science fiction.
Glaciers can also be made secure by the use of common sense. It is for opinion-makers in India and Pakistan to tell their respective governments to stop ruining the future of our water supplies and our weather system. Bringing their troops down from the inhospitable heights of Siachen would be the first step. This would be welcomed by the troops as well as the mountain wildlife that has been displaced by the war.
(The writers are Islamabad-based environmentalists.)
Post a Comment
(If you haven't left a comment here before, you may need to be approved by the site owner before your comment will appear. Until then, it won't appear on the entry. Thanks for waiting.)
Name:
