Featuring Customized Search and News Feed of Reviewed, Authoritative Content
Real Climate Solutions, Sanctioning Non-Kyoto Governments
The French government has come up with an intriguing and long overdue policy proposal of taxing countries' goods whose government has not ratified Kyoto [ more ] - namely Annex I countries Australia and the United States. This presumably would compensate for their free rider economic behavior. Australia has signaled they are moving closer to ratifying Kyoto in practice if not in name [ more ]. Meanwhile the Swiss are pushing the golden bullet of climate change policy - a broad based international tax on carbon emissions . They propose that revenue be used for measures mitigating the effects of global warming. This is very similar to Ecological Internet's own Lincoln Plan which further proposes tax increases are offset by tax reductions on employment. UK is to tax gas guzzling SUVs . And there is growing concensus in Nairobi that a Kyoto successor must come soone and include mandatory emission caps for all nations [ more | more2 ] while being more flexible and taking into account historical emissions levels and allowing developing nations some allowance to reduce poverty. Clearly China is feeling the pressure to justify their policy as Chinese emissions are soaring .
Posted by Dr. Glen Barry on November 15, 2006  5:38 AM  | More on Kyoto international climate policy
Comments
I agree that sanctions and control efforts need to be implemented to help reduce emissions. However, I also believe that we cannot slow down the rate of emissions fast enough to get us to a balancing point. We must look at ways to pull carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases out of the atmosphere if we are to keep levels below the 400ppm threshold.
One suggestion is to develop huge oceanic algae farms, then to harvest those farms and transport the processed algae sludge (water extracted) to a polar region for freezing. This would lock the CO2 into sheets of ice (providing there is any ice left).
Some would suggest using the algae for fuel, but this only releases the CO2 back into the atmosphere making it a CO2 neutral initiative. Locking the algae into sheets of ice would remove the CO2 from the atmosphere. However, there could be a dual initiative.
Yes this would be a monumental effort, but if each nation did their fair share, we could all work together to make the farming initiative successful. This, combined with emission control initiatives, might do the trick, but only if we act in time.
Perhaps whomever came up with the algae freezing plan missed the class on photosynthesis. For all you folks out there who missed this one, plants (including algae) take in CO2, yes, and then they produce carbohydrates (food) and release oxygen (we breathe that) Feezing the algae would eliminate the CO2 removers and deplete the oxygen levels. Brilliant!!! Great plan!!!Oh yes, the Holocence which we are in is called an interglacial period. That is a time when glaciers melt. What are we missing here. 18,000 years ago a warming period began. Chances are the ice where you currently live was a mile thick. Makes the current warming period not sound so bad?
Feeling a little cynical Kirt. I didn't miss that class. The point was to grow the algae then lock in the CO2 they contain by freezing it. Then you grow some more. Kinda like growing corn. However, I do agree with your point about reducing population and would like to hear your thoughts about how you plan to implement that.
Post a Comment
(If you haven't left a comment here before, you may need to be approved by the site owner before your comment will appear. Until then, it won't appear on the entry. Thanks for waiting.)
Name:
