Featuring Customized Search and News Feed of Reviewed, Authoritative Content
ALERT: Climate Protection Payments Must Avoid Deforestation of Ancient Rainforests AND Their Industrial Diminishment
TAKE ACTION  : Selective logging diminishes primary and old-growth forests' carbon stores, ecosystems, and biodiversity; and has no place in proposed carbon market payments for rainforest and climate protection
The concept of "avoided deforestation" -- whereby countries are paid to protect forests -- is the most promising rainforest and climate change policy development in years. It fights climate change at a low cost while preserving other ecosystem services, safeguarding biodiversity and improving living standards for some of the world's poorest people. Unlike other proposed forest conservation solutions, such as "certified" forest logging of ancient forests (primary and old-growth forests), it has the potential to maintain standing rainforests in an intact, fully functioning condition; while meeting reasonable local development needs...
For the first time a grouping of tropical rainforest rich countries, called the "Forestry Eight" and controlling over 80 percent of the world's tropical rainforests, agree and are proposing a plan to be paid to protect their rainforests and thus reduce global warming... Troublingly, many crucial details regarding how avoided deforestation payments would work remain undefined...
Let the "Forestry Eight" know that in order to ensure carbon payments for rainforest and climate protection are rigorous and maximally effective, they must be made to avoid both rainforest deforestation AND diminishment, which excludes ANY industrial development. Only equitable payments for strict preservation will maximize climate, ecosystem, biodiversity and local benefit. Anything less is greenwashing and will not solve anything. TAKE ACTION  :
Posted by Dr. Glen Barry on September 21, 2007 10:51 AM  | More on climate rainforests avoided deforestation
Comments
Do you really think these actions make any difference at all?  The people on your list are civil servants!  It's voters and politicians you need to be aiming at, not clogging civil servants' mail boxes!
RESPONSE: Ah, well, yes we do. It leads to many outright victories such as those at http://www.climateark.org/kudos/ and to awareness raising. And most importantly it puts those making decisions effecting our future on notice that they are being watched and will be held accountable.
I think this action will work, but we have to keep pushing the governments that involved in 'Forestry Eight'. We have to make sure that those countries do the right thing for conservation and biodiversity and not just 'after' the carbon money. Let's keep watching them. For climateark, keep the good work. Good luck!
Glen-
Why don't you include the forest stakeholders in Canada and the US? Our forests also sequester carbon, and deforestation is occurring here just like in the Southern Hemisphere.
We consume 27% of the globe's wood products.
Mike Roddy
Good job, Glenn. I also would agree that it helps motivate to see who the e mails go to.
I believe the rainforest focus is good because it may be dissappearing much faster than the boreal forest and holds more species especially charismatic megafauna.
Much of the tropical wood is not logged for wood production at all, but simply burned for firewood and land clearing.
this sounds very promising, but I was wondering where Brunei is among the forestry 8... ok so they're tiny, but their forest is by and large pristine ancient rain forest,   in stark contrast to other Borneo states. Was Brunei invited to join?
Post a Comment
(If you haven't left a comment here before, you may need to be approved by the site owner before your comment will appear. Until then, it won't appear on the entry. Thanks for waiting.)
Name:
