News, Opinion, Analysis
Recent Comments
February 01, 2010
Imagine my surprise when I woke up this morning and found about 10 inches of snow!
And ends like this:
Read the whole dang thing here: When a coal state goes nuclear . (And read the comments if you'd like to see me ripped for my recognition of benefits and  costs).
The summary: Gayer's original piece makes sense and is being misinterpreted by the critics. He is not  saying energy efficiency investments don't make sense from a social point of view. He is  saying that the casual claim of negative net costs is not quite right. To illustrate this I extend the sidewalk dollar bill analogy to a more complicated transaction focusing on the discount rate.
Here is how I conclude:
So, I think the criticism made by Avent and Krugman is a bit unfair. It seems that all three players in the spat reach the same conclusion about the economics of climate change: that government action is necessary to provide incentives to firms to adopt energy efficiency investments. The best government action could be cap-and-trade or a carbon tax. I’m always surprised at the intensity of the debate among economists who basically agree over their disagreements about the minutiae of the issue.
And with that, I wish you a happy new year!
Tim and my env-econ.net posts appear over at the Energy Collective and I'm on their blogger board . This past year the site got big (i.e., was embiggened ):
2009 was a watershed year for TheEnergyCollective, in which we broke from our small-but-lively-with-great-contributors status to something, well, more substantive, more newsworthy and definitely more popular.  The year saw our number of annual visitors climb from under 30,000 to over 250,000, and we delivered over 4M page views.
Wow, that is fantastic growth (env-econ.net gets about 30,000 annual visitors). Congrats!
If you are tired of all of the nonsense about the recent climate nonsense ( SuperFreakonomics , Climategate ) and want to read something reasonable about climate change economics, try the latest CBO Economic and Budget Issue Brief [ PDF ] titled “The Costs of Reducing Greenhouse-Gas Emissions.” If you aren’t into 12 pages of summary of economic models here is a summary on the CBO Director’s Blog . Or, you can read this post for my summary of the summary.
That said, here is my short and sweet summary, with all of the CBO caveats and other sensitivities left out. Incentive-based policy:
… would change people’s behavior (a lot).
… is cheaper than command-and-control.
… would lower overall economic activity (a little).
... also creates benefits.
Read the whole dang thing for some explanation of 1-5 (as if you haven't heard it before around here).
I admit that I’m torn in my opinion about SuperFreakonomics. I was predisposed to fully embrace it. The first book, Freakonomics, did great things for the economics profession. It made economics interesting and readable. It broadened the scope of the field in the mind of the public. Plus, Dubner is a graduate of Appalachian State University. He came to campus, gave the opening convocation talk, I went to his public reading, met him and he sent my kids a free copy of his Belly Button book. I’ve also contributed at the Freakonomics blog. So, I was horrified to hear that they got the science in their climate change chapter all wrong.
Don’t be mistaken. I don’t know if it is all wrong or not. I’m a simple economist. But it seems that real-life climate scientists, and not just the advocates, think that it is really, really wrong as well. The problem, to me, is that Dubner and Levitt stepped a bit too far outside their realm of economics.
And ends like this:
In the middle I tell a fish story.
The Energy Collective has another webinar coming up on 10/28, 1pm EST on Rethinking the Electric Grid: Modernizing the Nation's Transmission System .  Marc Gunther will be moderating. This will be is the second in the series they are putting on this fall:
With $4 billion of the 2009 American Recovery and Reinvestment Act designated for the “Smart Grid,” or modernization of the nation’s electrical transmission systems, investment has accelerated at a feverish pace in viable projects initiated by utilities, research facilities, and technology companies.
The Smart Grid represents more than a commercial opportunity. It will make possible more efficient and lower cost delivery of power, better informed customers, smart appliances, distributed energy, electric cars and a host of other innovations yet to be invented.
The Energy Collective has another webinar coming up on 10/28, 1pm EST on Rethinking the Electric Grid: Modernizing the Nation's Transmission System .  Marc Gunther will be moderating. This will be is the second in the series they are putting on this fall:
With $4 billion of the 2009 American Recovery and Reinvestment Act designated for the “Smart Grid,” or modernization of the nation’s electrical transmission systems, investment has accelerated at a feverish pace in viable projects initiated by utilities, research facilities, and technology companies.
The Smart Grid represents more than a commercial opportunity. It will make possible more efficient and lower cost delivery of power, better informed customers, smart appliances, distributed energy, electric cars and a host of other innovations yet to be invented.
Ah! Liberals versus conservatives, economists criticized for their politics … don’t you love the economic debate over … the cap-and-trade part of Waxman-Markey. Did you think I was going to say “economic stimulus” or “health care”?
Paul Krugman, in his September 24
th
column (“ It’s easy being green ”), rips those he disagrees with: “the campaign against saving the planet rests mainly on lies” and “partisan opposition to President Obama trumps any concerns about intellectual honesty.” In the article he is ripping Glenn Beck, but in his blog he points the finger at fellow (well-respected) economist Martin Feldstein.
In the middle I defend Feldstein after carefully reading his June 1 piece in the WaPo (" Cap and Trade: All Cost, No Benefit ") and the Krugman interpretations ( here and here ). I also write a paragraph on my twin policy rant (cap-and-trade plus revenue recycling does not equal cap-and-trade). Then I end like this:
... certain economists should quit calling people liars in their public discourse. Not nice.
My climate policy views are closer to Krugman's than Feldstein's but, jeez, you can clarify someone's argument, point out its limitations and even discover errors without calling someone a "liar" and "intellectually dishonest".
Feel free to do your own bit of name calling (e.g., pinhead ) in the comments section!
Key U.S. CEOs and world leaders are urging the Obama Administration not to go empty-handed to the UNFCCC Conference in Copenhagen this December. All eyes are on the president, who will address the UN on climate change in New York on September 22 while the Senate considers climate legislation back in DC. But with the President’s focus on passing health care legislation, the climate bill awaiting action in the Senate risks being “back-burnered.”
Todd Stern, the U.S. State Department lead negotiator, has urged Congress to act. How critical is it that the U.S. climate negotiators have a bill this year? Would a strong bilateral China-U.S. agreement before December be sufficient instead? In the Senate, what type of climate and energy bill has the greatest likelihood of passage, and how will it differ from the House version? Do you agree with TEC blogger Joe Romm of climateprogress.org that there could be a “better” climate bill next year?
To explore these issues and to answer your questions about the current legislation, The Energy Collective and several of its members are presenting a live interactive panel discussion on September 30, at 1 pm Eastern. We hope you will join us.
I've registered. I've enjoyed the lull in the environmental economics news that health care reform has provided and I'll need an energy boost before ACES hits the Senate. This might be it.
... Exxon worked really hard and paid consultants alot of money to make my, and many others, research agenda look like junk science. This usually sends a chill down my back but I’ve recently realized that it was a good thing, research-wise. With Exxon as a common enemy, funding studies that disputed CVM, journal pages were eating up papers dealing with both sides of the issue. Who would have wanted to publish my papers without an oil spill and Exxon claiming junk science was being used to value Prince William Sound resources?
By the way, Exxon lost the junk science debate. While CVM is still controversial it is the most widely used method to value the environment for benefit-cost analysis.
Search
-- Economic Way of Thinking
-- UKNEE
-- The Olive Ridley Crawl
-- Mark C R UK
-- American Institute of Biological Sciences
-- Fritz
... the Environmental Economics blog ... is now the default homepage on my browser (but then again, I guess I am a wonk -- a word I learned on the E.E. blog). That is a very nice service to the profession.
-- Anonymous
"... I try and read the blog everyday and have pointed it out to other faculty who have their students read it for class. It is truly one of the best things in the blogosphere."
-- Anonymous
