Archive Article
Robin Pagnamenta, Energy Editor
The world “desperately needs” President Obama to attend the United Nations  meeting in Copenhagen if an effective deal on tackling climate change is to  be reached this December, according to one of the world’s leading climate  experts.
In an interview with The Times,  Lord Stern of Brentford threw down the  gauntlet to the US Administration, claiming that American leadership was  urgently required if this historic opportunity presented was not to be  squandered. “President Obama should be there. His leadership would make an  enormous difference. My message to President Obama would be: come to  Copenhagen, come in a collaborative spirit and take this message to the  American people.”
Lord Stern, who was chief economist at the World Bank and is the author of the  landmark 2006  study on the economics of climate change, was speaking after The Times  disclosed on Saturday that Mr Obama was unlikely to be there, adding to  concerns that Copenhagen is unlikely to yield a workable agreement amid  continued deadlock between the US, China and India over pledges to cut their  greenhouse gas emissions.
Lord Stern has a blunt message for the world’s politicians. “If we continue  with business as usual we would be looking at temperature increases of 5  degrees centigrade by early next century,” he said.
Related Links
“We have not seen those sort of conditions for 30million years. These kind of  changes will have huge consequences — southern Europe is likely to be a  desert; hundreds of millions of people will have to move. There will be  severe global conflict.”
It is a crisis, he said, that “will come to us incredibly fast and the scale  of the risk is huge”.
So far, he said, public opinion in this country and around the world had  simply failed to grasp the significance of the December meeting, the  intention of which is to prevent catastrophic climate change by curbing  emissions enough to prevent a rise of more than 2 degrees centigrade in  average global temperatures.
“People need to understand just how big this is,” he said, adding that  consumers needed to face the fact that dealing with climate change would  mean higher costs for a range of basic goods, including energy and food.
“Politicians and others should be honest about this. Some prices will go up.  In the short run, you are going to see an increase in electricity bills as  companies are regulated into using new technologies.” But, he said, society  needed to treat this as an investment in the future.
“High carbon growth will kill itself . . . So we are setting up a process that  will be extraordinarily beneficial in terms of energy security and  biodiversity,” Lord Stern said. “These are benefits that go well beyond  tackling climate change. If we get this right and introduce strong policies  then we will kick off a process of industrial change that will be more  profound than the industrial revolution.”
Lord Stern said that Copenhagen presented a unique opportunity for the world  to break free from its catastrophic current trajectory. Despite scepticism  about whether a deal could be struck, most governments now agreed on the  basic parameters of an agreement, he said. At Copenhagen, the world needs to  agree to halve global greenhouse gas emissions by 2030 to 25 gigatonnes a  year from 50 gigatonnes now. By 2050 emissions need to have fallen to below  20 gigatonnes per year.
Rich countries would need to commit themselves to spending $50billion  (£31billion) a year by 2015 to help poor countries to deal with the costs of  adapting to the climate change that was now inevitable. The US would need to  provide perhaps $20billion of this total, he said, while the UK would need  to spend $5billion a year — equivalent to £53 for every man, woman and  child.
“In the next five years if the rich world can’t put $50billion on the table  then there will be real questions about whether or not they are serious,”  Lord Stern said. “I would see the US as giving at least $15billion to  $20billion, but that is small beer in terms of the US economy. I believe  President Obama understands this very well.”
Developing countries, led by China, which is the biggest carbon polluter in  the world, and India, say that at Copenhagen the developed world needs to  commit itself to cuts of at least 40 per cent below 1990 levels by 2020 to  avoid the worst of climate change.
But in the US, which is the secondbiggest producer of emissions, the focus on  healthcare reform has reduced the chances of a commitment on anything like  that scale. The US Senate has not agreed a goal for 2020.
Although China and India are not expected to agree to achieve cuts in their  emissions before 2020, persuading them to agree to longer-term reductions  without US leadership will be tough.
Five to watch at Copenhagen
Lord Stern  Bookish British academic from LSE, formerly chief economist  at the World Bank, earned his place in global climate debate after his 2006  review on the economics of climate change
Rajendra Pachauri Indian chairman of Intergovernmental Panel on Climate  Change, among most outspoken figures in climate debate
Al Gore  Nobel Peace prize-winning former presidential candidate and  without doubt the biggest star on global climate concern circuit thanks to  his film An Inconvenient Truth
Yvo de Boer Dutch executive secretary of UN  Framework Convention on Climate Change , who will be expected to pull  deal together
Connie Hedegaard  Danish Minister for Climate Change and Energy - will  have the unenviable role of chairing the meeting.
