News, Opinion, Analysis
Recent Comments
Is “thinking green” an economic luxury?  Intuition implies that it may be, but so far there’s been little empirical evidence on the subject. Two economists recently changed that: using data from Google keyword searches between 2004 and 2010,   Matthew E. Kahn and Matthew J. Kotchen found that “higher unemployment rates within a state decrease internet search activity for global warming, but increase search activity for unemployment. Based on this revealed preference for interest in global warming, therefore, it appears that recessions crowd out concern for the environment…” The authors also used recent survey data to analyze the link between unemployment and climate-change denial, concluding that “an increase in a state’s unemployment rate is associated with a decrease in the probability that residents think global warming is happening, and with a reduction in the certainty of those who think it is. Higher unemployment rates are also associated with views that we should do less with respect to policies designed to reduce global warming.”
Is “thinking green” an economic luxury?  Intuition implies that it may be, but so far there’s been little empirical evidence on the subject. Two economists recently changed that: using data from Google keyword searches between 2004 and 2010,   Matthew E. Kahn and Matthew J. Kotchen found that “higher unemployment rates within a state decrease internet search activity for global warming, but increase search activity for unemployment. Based on this revealed preference for interest in global warming, therefore, it appears that recessions crowd out concern for the environment…” The authors also used recent survey data to analyze the link between unemployment and climate-change denial, concluding that “an increase in a state’s unemployment rate is associated with a decrease in the probability that residents think global warming is happening, and with a reduction in the certainty of those who think it is. Higher unemployment rates are also associated with views that we should do less with respect to policies designed to reduce global warming.”
Two stretches of beach at the Cape Hatteras National seashore have reopened for off-road vehicles and pedestrians.
The Virginian-Pilot of Norfolk reported Tuesday the shoreline access corridor on Bodie Island Spit south of ramp 4 to Oregon Inlet and a beach between ramp 23 and the southern boundary of Salvo is open for vehicles and pedestrians. The sites were closed because of nesting shorebirds, but the nesting season is ending.
Other parts of the park remain closed. Visitors cannot drive between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. on any Cape Hatteras National Seashore beaches.
I'm not sure what else to say about this one since we've worn out the piping plover story over the years.
Posted by John Whitehead on August 24, 2010 at 09:35 AM |  Permalink |  Comments (2)
THE amount of plastic thrown away by Americans increased fourfold between 1980 and 2008. It is a reasonable assumption that as more plastic is produced and discarded, this will affect oceanic pollution. But a study of the north Atlantic and the Caribbean, just published in Science , suggests things are not getting worse. Between 1986 and 2008 there was no increase in the concentration of plastic in the areas looked at despite a steady rise in the amount discarded. Kara Law and her colleagues at the Sea Education Association in Woods Hole, Massachusetts have no explanation for this lack of accumulation. A programme by the American plastics industry that resulted in a decrease in the number of pellets in the water is still insufficient to explain the data. Nor does the missing plastic seem to have sunk; trawls at depth show no sign of it. The Sargasso Sea of legend, and its modern equivalent, the Bermuda Triangle, are supposed to be places where things disappear without trace. Dr Law seems to have come up with a real example.
The best explanation received in the comments section will receive a warm and hearty pat on the back.
Hat tip: PEC.
From Facebook:
G'gay [sic] from Tim Haab in Tasmania Australia. very odd to see someone has  my name. especially as its such a rare name in Australia. Only my  familly of 5. do you have a Swiss background?
Another Tim Haab?  My wife just passed out.
As for the Swiss background, there is a family rumor that I am somehow related to former two-time (1922 and 1929) President of the Swiss Confederation , Robert Haab from Wadenswil (that 'a' should have those two little dotty things over it, but I don't feel like looking up how to do that in html).
He was a radical liberal.
On second thought, maybe we're not related.
Microsoft install some automatic updates on my computer Friday and wanted me to restart the machine to complete installation. I didn't want to restart because I was ... working dag gummit (!). I figure I'd shut down for the weekend and Microsoft would be happy, right? Monday morning and I start my machine and get busy reading Peter King ... er, working and 20 minutes in Microsoft has installed more updates and wants me to restart again.
As polite as I can be: Buzz off Microsoft.
Posted by John Whitehead on August 23, 2010 at 08:43 AM |  Permalink |  Comments (7)
In a new policy brief, RFF Senior Fellow Timothy Brennan explains that the long-term costs of ratcheting up liability for oil spills like the recent tragedy in the Gulf of Mexico will primarily be borne not by companies involved in oil exploration. BP has accepted full financial responsibility for clean-up costs and lost wages for all who suffered direct consequences, such as local fishermen. But in the future, two less mobile groups will be hurt when the high cost of complying with tough new regulations push oil exploration elsewhere: local workers and landowners concerned about the threat to the local economy when jobs are lost and all of us taxpayers from the loss of lease fees and taxes paid to the U.S. Treasury.
3.1 Who is an Eligible claimant?
Individuals and Businesses that have incurred damages as a result of the Spill may submit a claim to the GCCF for Removal and Clean Up Costs, Damage to Real or Personal Property, Lost Earnings or Profits, Loss of Subsistence Use of Natural Resources, or Physical Injury or Death.
3.2 Do I have to live in the Gulf region to make a claim?
No.  Any Individual or Business may submit a claim to the GCCF for costs and damages incurred as a result of the oil discharges from the Spill.  However, to receive payment from the GCCF, your costs and damages must have been proximately caused by the Spill and must not be too remote in time or place from the Spill.
Proximate: very or relatively close.
Used in a sentence.  We're sorry to inform you that your claim has been denied because of our willy-nilly interpretation of how close 'proximate' really is.
Posted by Tim Haab on August 23, 2010 at 07:05 AM in Natural Hazards |  Permalink |  Comments (0)
Duke and UNC-CH will never be able get along*:
Duke Energy will pull the plug on its plan to build up to three wind turbines in North Carolina's Pamlico Sound, the company said today, citing high costs.
Duke and UNC-Chapel Hill signed a contract last September to work together in the demonstration project, which would evaluate the potential of wind energy and its environmental impacts on the sound.
Duke said it will now refocus its work on larger-scale wind projects in offshore waters. High initial costs make a larger project more economically viable than a smaller one, Duke said.
It would cost $88 million to install the first turbine in Pamlico Sound, the company said. The second one would run $14 million.
This sounds like we're on the declining portion of the average total cost curve , where high average fixed costs dominate low average variable costs and low marginal costs:
*Note: Yes, I realize it is Duke Energy and not Duke University.
Hat tip: TLC
People and businesses seeking a lump-sum settlement from BP ’s $20 billion oil spill compensation fund will most likely have to waive their right to sue not only BP, but also all the other major defendants involved with the spill, according to internal documents from the lawyers handling the fund.
The eligibility requirements for compensation from the fund are similar  to those of the 9/11 victims compensation fund, which Mr. Feinberg also  handled. People affected by the spill seeking final settlements face a  choice  similar to that faced by the 9/11 victims: If they decide to sue  instead of accepting a settlement, they could face years of litigation;  and if they decide to accept the settlement, it could come before the  full damage from the spill is known.
A key difference between the spill fund and the Sept. 11 victim  compensation fund is the matter of geographic proximity. The 9/11 fund  took that issue into account, but it was less controversial because that  fund focused on compensating people injured in the terrorist attacks  and families of those killed rather than adversely affected businesses.
Fishermen, shrimpers and seafood processors as well as hotel and restaurant owners with beachfront property in areas where oil washed ashore will have the easiest time getting reimbursed. An ice  cream parlor or a golf course miles from the affected shore but along  the main highway headed to the beach will probably not be eligible, the  documents indicate.
Interesting.  If most of the local businesses choose to take the bird in the hand, that means most of the lawsuits will have to focus on indirect (or passive?) damages.
I think they're going to need someone (or sometwo--John?) to estimate the passive use losses.
I reluctantly volunteer my services.
For the right price.
Posted by Tim Haab on August 20, 2010 at 09:33 AM in Natural Hazards |  Permalink |  Comments (5)
Search
-- Economic Way of Thinking
-- UKNEE
-- The Olive Ridley Crawl
-- Mark C R UK
-- American Institute of Biological Sciences
-- Fritz
... the Environmental Economics blog ... is now the default homepage on my browser (but then again, I guess I am a wonk -- a word I learned on the E.E. blog). That is a very nice service to the profession.
-- Anonymous
"... I try and read the blog everyday and have pointed it out to other faculty who have their students read it for class. It is truly one of the best things in the blogosphere."
-- Anonymous
