Sunday, April 15 10:48 am EST
A series of events took place yesterday all over the United States to indicate people’s concern about climate change. The Step It Up website  said: “In all 50 states, at more than 1400 iconic places across the nation, we have united around a common call to action: “Step It Up Congress: Cut Carbon 80% by 2050.’” Bill McKibben  , a writer whose The End of Nature  was the first popular book written on global warming, was the leading light of Step It Up. Here’s coverage  of the events and an interview with McKibben from “Democracy Now.”
In New York City  , there w ere a number of ev ents, including the Sea of People in Battery Park. I was there and had a fine time. McKibben was one of the speakers.
There were a good number of other speakers including one of our leading urban environmentalists, Eric Goldstein from the Natural Resources Defense Council . I also talked to Charles Komanoff at the rally. Charles is one of the founders of the Carbon Tax Center and an energy economist who’s been around for a long time. He has been one of the leading analysts of the financial issues around nuclear power. (See this report from Greenpeace for instance.)
As I indicated, a good time was had by all, including by this polar bear and my daughter, Diana.
… what about these people?
California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger (R) from a speech  yesterday at the Council on Foreign Relations , “I can tell you, mainstream scientists are convinced, mainstream CEOs are convinced, and if you look at the surveys, mainstream Americans are convinced, that global warming and climate change is real, and that we have to do something about it.”  Also, from this week, a “Newsweek” special section on Leadership & the Environment: Green Issues  :  “For the record, Schwarzenegger says he’s deeply impressed with Gore’s work: he even popped into a Beverly Hills book-signing not long ago with his teenage daughter to tell the former vice president so in person.”
Jeroen van der Veer, Chief Executive, Royal Dutch Shell ,  “I am more convinced than ever that our short- and long-term business success depend on finding environmentally and socially responsible ways to help meet the world’s future energy needs.”  (From the Shell website  .)
Pope Benedict XVI said in August:  “In dialogue with Christians of various churches, we need to commit ourselves to caring for the created world, without squandering its resources, and sharing them in a cooperative way.”  (See this  .)
Jim Mulva, ConocoPhillips’ chairman and chief executive, in joining the U.S. Climate Action Partnership this week:  “We recognize that human activity, including the burning of fossil fuels, is contributing to increased concentrations of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere that can lead to adverse changes in global climate.” (Go here  .)
Lord Peter Levene, chairman of Lloyd’s of London:  “We cannot risk being in denial on catastrophe trends,” Levene said January 12 in a speech  to the World Affairs Council at the National Press Club. “We urgently need a radical rethink of public policy, and to build the facts into future planning.” See Lloyd’s webpage on climate change here  .
John McCain, U.S. Senator from Arizona (R), in testimony  before the Environment and Public Works Committee on Jan. 30, McCain called climate change “the most important environmental issue of our time.” (I cited this in the “Presidential Candidates” post below.)
Stephen Hawking, physicist, best-selling author of A Brief History of Time , and claimant of the   Cambridge University post once occupied by Sir Isaac Newton (the Lucasian Chair of Mathematics), has been quoted as saying, “I am afraid the atmosphere might get hotter and hotter until it will be like Venus with boiling sulfuric acid.”  (See this article  .)
Jim Rogers, Duke Energy CEO and chair of the Edison Electric Institute.  Rogers   played a key role in launching the U.S. Climate Action Partnership  .  In this recent interview , Rogers   said: “I think the probability that we’ll get good solutions to climate change — solutions that benefit both the planet and industry — is higher if we face the problem now than if we bury our heads in denial. If you’re constantly trying to define the problem, or deny it, or dispute it, it gets increasingly difficult and costly to develop a good solution.”  (I referred to Rogers   and an article about him in my post, “The Business of Green”  from March 9.)
John Dingell, Congressman from Michigan (D) and chairman of the Energy and Commerce Committee in the House of Representatives. “Rep. John Dingell once dismissed global warming as a “theory.’ Lately, the Democratic lawmaker from Michigan has had a change of heart. “The science on this question,’ he said recently, “has been settled.’” (This is from a recent “Wall St. Journal” article.  See my post “Bits and Bobs” from March 30.)
Evangelical Christian Pastor Rick Warren, named one of America’s Top 25 Leaders  in the October 31, 2005   issue of “U.S. News and World Report,” said, along with 85 other Christian leaders:  ” many of us have required considerable convincing before becoming persuaded that climate change is a real problem and that it ought to matter to us as Christians. But now we have seen and heard enough.”  (See my post on this and some of the controversy surrounding it in “Bits and Bobs” below.)
UN secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, in a statement  from March:  ” the danger posed by war to all of humanity - and to our planet - is at least matched by the climate crisis and global warming.”
German Chancellor Angela Merkel, commenting on the IPCC’s latest report, said:  “The report confirms that climate change is a fact. For that reason we need rapid and decisive action to limit the global rise in temperatures and to cut carbon dioxide emissions.”  (See my post on the EU Summit Agreement  from March 14 for more on Merkel and efforts in Europe.)
British Prime Minister Tony Blair, from an article he wrote last October commenting on the Stern Report  , cited at the PM’s web page on climate change  :  “The Stern Report should be seen across the globe as the final word on why the world must act now to limit the damage we are doing to our planet.  The conclusions are a wake-up call to every country in the world.”
British Conservative Party Leader David Cameron:  “ Today, in the twenty first century, the greatest long term threat this planet faces is climate change.” (From a speech from July  last year. See also this at the Conservative website, “   David Cameron praised by Al Gore  .”)
Does climate change matter as an issue for the presidential campaigns?   See
had been passed in 157 town meetings, turned down in 11 and been tabled in 5. New Hampshire certainly does not represent the whole nation, but it's a pretty important barometer, particularly for the presidential campaigns. (We have looked at world and national public opinion in two previous posts below, "The Ayes Have It" and "The Ayes Have It , Part Deux.")
Where do the candidates stand?   Let's do a very quick survey. Republicans first.
John McCain , His
"  which was introduced three and a half years ago.
Rudy Giuliani , His campaign website is silent on environmental issues. As someone who follows New York City politics and who was deeply involved in two mayoral races working on environmental issues, I will tell you that Giuliani, at best, did not pay much attention at all to the issue and there are any number of local open space and environmental advocates who will tell you his policies were regressive. A New Hampshire
Mitt Romney , In a
in February, Romney called for increasing domestic energy supply with nukes, biofuel, " and other sources of renewable energy." He also said reducing per capita energy consumption was important. He frames this as an energy independence concern, not tying it to climate change. The news article from N.H. referenced above says that a spokesperson said he:   "thinks it's likely human activity is contributing to the environment, but is not sure how much."
Sam Brownback , His campaign website refers to energy but not the environment or climate change. It cites his co-sponsorship of an energy bill in the Senate that "that relies on advanced technology and an expansion of renewable fuels." His
Next the Democrats.
is quite specific about how to address climate change and establish a "new energy economy" creating a million jobs. He says:   " Our generation must be the one that says, "we must halt global warming.' Our generation must be the one that says "yes' to renewable fuels and ends forever our dependence on foreign oil . " Edwards has even called for April to be "
says this, among other things, about climate change:   "The scientific consensus on climate change is increasingly clear: unless we act to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases, the planet will continue to warm over the next century, with widespread and potentially devastating effects."
Barack Obama , His campaign
" in which he said, rather unflinchingly, " unless we free ourselves from a dependence on these fossil fuels and chart a new course on energy in this country, we are condemning future generations to global catastrophe."
Bill Richardson , As head of the Department of Energy under Clinton and as Governor of New Mexico, Richardson has more of a track record than other candidates. At DOE, he implemented energy efficiency standards and helped promote renewables. Two years ago, Richardson and Arnold Schwarzenegger jointly called for a
on energy he gave on March 14 in which some specifics include reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 75% by 2050, getting auto efficiency to 50 mpg in ten years, and that climate change could mean "severe weather, flooding and drought and the alterations of agricultural production, rising sea levels, new disease patterns, widespread economic dislocations and destruction and a host of other problems." No punches pulled there.
Dennis Kucinich , "
says:   "There has to be a renewable energy portfolio of at least 20% by 2010. And that means introducing wind, solar, hydrogen, geothermal, biomass, and all of the options that must be available and need incentivizing. That also means withdrawing incentives for the production of nonrenewable energy."
Chris Dodd , The
says that by:   " using energy more efficiently, and by using more clean and renewable sources of energy, Sen. Dodd believes that we should be able to lead the world in reducing the amount of greenhouse gas emissions that are contributing to global warming. In his view, it is high time that the United States re-join the commitment made by industrialized nations in Kyoto, Japan to reduce greenhouse gas emissions."
Joe Biden , On climate change, the
says the candidate "supports a "cap and trade' approach to regulating emissions and investment in technologies that can significantly reduce greenhouse gas emissions." On energy, he would make "a substantial national commitment by dramatically increasing investment in energy and climate change research and technology so that the United States becomes the world leader in developing and exporting alternative energy."
Mike Gravel ­, "
" is the paragraph title at his website. " We must act swiftly to reduce America  's carbon footprint in the world by passing legislation that caps emissions," it says, among other things.
Okay, that's the overview. You will hear more and more about the issues of climate change and energy policy from the candidates as the campaign progresses, not only in New Hampshire   but everywhere. This may be the first time, in fact, that energy and the environment become top-tier campaign concerns.
Saturday, April 7 3:27 pm EST
I want to send you to my colleague Bonnie Boyd's terrific article on climate change in Central Asia. Bonnie is the FPA's blogger on Central Asia and has got some really interesting posts going up.  
Saturday, April 7 3:10 pm EST
The  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change issued its second report of the year yesterday in Brussels. (I referenced this in
below on April 3.) The IPCC Report is titled "Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability" , that's a mouthful. Go to the IPCC website  for all the material relevant to this including the "  Summary for Policymakers  " and a video of the press conference. There will be 16 regional press briefings  around the world in the next couple of weeks, including one in Washington on April 16. There are over a thousand news articles about this listed by Google. I won't get into the specifics too much here. Suffice it to say that the headlines read like this one from Reuters:  "  U.N. panel issues stark climate change warning  ." The BBC has this informative interactive map  by region and by area of concern to describe what's being reported. (I touched on some of the impacts that are being found in "Bits and Bobs"  from March 30 below.)
One serious bone of contention between some of the 2,500 scientists who've been involved in this year's series of IPCC updates and some of the government representatives who represent political interests is how much damage global warming has already been responsible for causing. (This particular 1,572-page report was prepared by more than 200 scientists, and a 21-page summary was endorsed by officials from more than 120 countries.) But, the conclusion, after all the jockeying, is that human activity causing global warming " over the last three decades has had a discernible influence on many physical and biological systems." One of the co-chairs of the report team said:  "We're no longer arm-waving with models. This is empirical information on the ground."
It's clear, for instance, that carbon dioxide has been making the world's oceans more acidic. Harvey Marchant, lead author on polar regions for the report, said: "Carbon dioxide emissions into the atmosphere continue to rise, putting a greater strain on the world's oceans which are being forced to absorb more of these emissions than ever before and with potentially catastrophic effects." Elizabeth Kolbert, the brilliant and passionate journalist and author of Field Notes from a Catastrophe: Man, Nature, and Climate Change  , had a stunning article on this in "The New Yorker" on November 20 last year:  "The
Darkening Sea , What carbon emissions are doing to the ocean."Another immediate concern is the vulnerability of certain populations, many of which live in coastal regions. I referenced the 634 million people who live in vulnerable shore areas under Global Ecology  in "Bits and Bobs" below, and a report on the dangers from storms and rising seas. See also this terrific slide show  from Andrew Revkin and the "NY Times." Rajendra Pachauri, Chairman of the IPCC, said:  "It's the poorest of the poor in the world, and this includes poor people even in prosperous societies, who are going to be the worst hit." In a report timed to coincide with the IPCC schedule, "Save the Children" claimed "
So, we're hearing again that it's past time to act. Ed Markey, Chairman of the Select Committee on Energy Independence and Global Warming in the U.S. House of Representatives, said:  "This Congress must rise to the challenge of transitioning from energy sources that threaten the planet and preparing for the damage we can no longer avoid." (See more  from Markey.) Hans Verolme of WWF (formerly the World Wildlife Fund) said: "The urgency of this report…should be matched with an equally urgent response by governments." Michael Oppenheimer, a world leader in public interest science for many years and an author of the report, said: "The actual outcome in terms of damages and ruined lives and costs depends heavily on the response ‚  the response of individuals to deal with the changes and governments to organize and anticipate and deal with this in advance."
Winston Churchill said:  "I never worry about action, but only inaction."
Thursday, April 5 3:49 pm EST
I've been looking at renewable energy , we used to call it alternative energy , for a long time. When I went, as a high schooler, to the first Earth Day in 1970, I said, "Yeah, great. This is the future." When I read
in 1985, I said "Okay, now we're really getting into gear." When Al Gore became Vice President in 1992, I thought this was an important development. Unfortunately, as I've learned, things move slowly. When industrial economies have been burning coal, oil and natural gas for 150 years, you don't jump right into the energy future. But so  slowly?  
Maybe we're making up for a lot of lost time now. Now we appear to really be on the cusp of a new way of doing business. As noted in my post below on
, venture capitalists are jumping in with both feet. Wind power and solar power are becoming very big business.
Energy efficiency and green building are both integrally connected to the burgeoning new energy economy, and I will have a good bit to say about these as we go on through the year, but I want to just highlight renewables for the moment. Biofuels and nuclear seem to me to be in a different category too from pure renewable energy. Wind, solar, geothermal, fuel cells, hydro, and even ocean and tidal power. These are the technologies that have fascinated me since the first Earth Day. I think the genie is finally out of the bottle. It's not a little exciting for me to see all this incredible activity. It should also be exciting for anyone who's concerned about climate change.
So here are some interesting morsels. "
This is a great overview of the state of the solar energy business from "The Economist" , "
" On geothermal, in January a major new report found enormous " potential for geothermal energy within the United States" and " that mining the huge amounts of heat that reside as stored thermal energy in the Earth's hard rock crust could supply a substantial portion of the electricity the United States will need in the future, probably at competitive prices and with minimal environmental impact." See
project which promises that "Average expected production will be 170 megawatts which is almost 75% of the 230 megawatt average electricity demand for Cape Cod   and the Islands of Martha's Vineyard and Nantucket  ." Now don't let anybody tell you that I think Republicans are the ones who always spoil the party. See this for instance:   "
Well anyway, I must say I feel a little like Rip Van Winkle sometimes. There's just such an enormous amount of forward movement on renewable energy these days. We're jumping from quanta to quanta. (Forgive me physicists among you for the no-doubt hugely liberal use of the term.)   I was beginning to think I'd never wake up to the sound of renewable energy bursting into the world's consciousness and becoming an accepted, even preferred source of power. Much more to come. Stay tuned.
Supreme Court  - As of noon Eastern time today, Google listed 1,127 news articles reporting on yesterday's U.S.
from the White House.   The reaction from some of the interested parties was, however, predictably jubilant.   "Fantastic news" was what the environmental secretary for Massachusetts deemed it.   M assachusetts was the lead plaintiff.   Senator Barbara Boxer, a sponsor of the strongest of the global-warming proposals so far put before Congress, said: "This decision puts the wind at our back."   A really critical player in Congress in all of this, John Dingell, had this to say:   "Today's ruling provides another compelling reason why Congress must enact, and the president must sign, comprehensive climate change legislation." (I mentioned Dingell's history, importance and role in last week's post, "Bits and Bobs" below.)
The ruling also gives ammunition to California in fighting the legal challenge to its
for which they need a waiver from the EPA. The Governator, Arnold Schwarzenegger, said about yesterday's ruling:   "We expect the U.S. E.P.A. to move quickly now in granting our request for a waiver."
Here's the caveat in all this, though:   The EPA will not break any speed records in racing to control carbon dioxide from automotive emissions nor any other source.   The EPA is a creature of the presidential administration and this President has said it's not on.  
What is  happening, though, is that momentum is building.   Congress will likely pass legislation this summer to increase energy efficiency and to boost renewable energy.   In the autumn, they may well get to passing something substantive on controlling carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases.   The pressure is definitely on the White House, as a result of the Supreme Court's decision and any number of other factors, including the pressure that will brought to bear on the U.S. at the
in the "NY Times" Science section today highlights the problems.   There are a number of good resources there, including a reader forum in which you can take part. 
That there is uneven development in the world is not, I'm afraid, news.   What is news is that people are raising the question of global warming's impact on the situation now and how it may exacerbate conditions in many impoverished places in the future.   The Kyoto Protocols have an important feature:   the
to find projects throughout the world.
Sydney  , Australia   , It may not have looked like much but Sydney made a statement the other night.   Organizers called it
, a move that the EU may well take.   Good on "ya!  
Update:   Glad to have gotten one wrong.  I said above that I thought the EPA would sit on its hands, but it is moving to process California's request for a waiver for automotive standards on carbon dioxide.  See this:  “EPA revives California's request to set tough emission standards”
Friday, March 30 7:11 pm EST
As I've noted before, there is a lot  going on!   What follows is another smattering of items like my "Smorgasbord" post below.  
Politics -   There is much to be discussed regarding the politics of climate change, internationally, between various stakeholders, and, of course, within countries. Two pieces from "The Economist," for instance, illustrate the intense politics in Britain   around climate change:   "  Climate change - A hot topic gets hotter" and the Bagehot  column, "Brave Dave v Cautious Gordon."   Both are from March 15 and both talk about the jockeying by the parties, Tory, Labour and Liberal Democrats, to be greener and to be seen by the British public as greener.   This, in my opinion, is a good battle to have waging.   To quote from the Bagehot column:   "But for all Mr Blair's pioneering efforts, it is David Cameron who can claim to have done most to make climate change the topic of the moment. It is probably fair to say that without the pressure (and the cover) that has come from Mr Cameron, the government which Mr Brown will soon lead would not be committing itself to the kind of measures called for by this week's draft bill on climate change."   (Go
for these articles and some others but be cautioned that "The Economist" is not free.   You can get a trial subscription in order to see these.   You can also see my post of March 14 below on the British initiatives.)
In the U.S., there are an array of political tensions:   between Republicans and Democrats, of course, but within the parties as well, and between factions within other constitutencies, such as the conservative Christian community.   I will but dip my toe into these waters for the moment, by citing two recent articles.   The first is about the "conversion" of John Dingell, the exceedingly powerful former and once-again chairman of the Energy and Commerce Committee in the House of Representatives.   Go
to see the committee's recent activity on climate change.   Dingell, back 20 years ago when I and many others were engaged in fighting for an acid rain title for the Clean Air Act, was a thorn, to say the least.   (George Bush, pe
re, it should be noted to his credit, helped break the logjam to bring forth the acid rain legislation in 1990.)   To return to Dingell, he represents a district in Detroit and he's spent his entire career being very protective indeed of the interests of the auto industry.   A recent article, though, "Changed Climate on Warming," from the "Wall St. Journal," reports that:   "  Rep. John Dingell once dismissed global warming as a "theory.' Lately, the Democratic lawmaker from Michigan   has had a change of heart. "The science on this question,' he said recently, "has been settled.'"   (Sorry to say, again, that this has gone into the pay-for-the-article zone.   You can go
to access it, or get it from the library.)
The other story that I want to flag for you concerns the very public spat between elements of the Evangelical Christian community in the U.S.     One recent focus of the contention has been the very active campaign waged against global warming by Richard Cizik, the vice president for governmental affairs of the National Association of Evangelicals.   The NAE, for your information, is an umbrella group, with hundreds of organizational members, and represents on the order of 30 million Americans.   See "
out there, among them Rick Warren, Jim Wallis, Leith Anderson, and former New York City   congressman Floyd Flake.
Agriculture   , The U.S. Department of Energy's Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, with a modest annual budget of about $1.6 billion and a staff of over 8,000 employees, is known for some pretty hotshot   research.   A recent report from them, Global scale climate,crop yield relationships and the impacts of recent warming , appeared in the very highly regarded "Environmental Research Letters."   The
from the LLNL says:   "Warming temperatures since 1981 have caused annual losses of roughly $5 billion for the major cereal crops "    One of the lead authors says:   "A key moving forward is how well cropping systems can adapt to a warmer world.   Investments in this area could potentially save billions of dollars and millions of lives."   Also at the LLNL website is
on how "Changes in agricultural practices could help slow global warming."
Economic Consequences  , Since we've hit on the subject, it might be a good moment to introduce  the blockbuster report, from the British government, from October 30 of last year:   the "  Stern Review on the Economics of Climate Change ."   It lays out some stark economic prospects:
Using the results from formal economic models, the Review estimates that if we don't
act, the overall costs and risks of climate change will be equivalent to losing at least
5% of global GDP each year, now and forever. If a wider range of risks and impacts
is taken into account, the estimates of damage could rise to 20% of GDP or more.
from CNN for just a sliver of the hullabaloo.   Much more about this in future posts.
Global Ecology , Here's an arresting lead:   "  A new global warming study predicts that many current climate zones will vanish entirely by the year 2100, replaced by climates unknown in today's world."   The study, discussed in
.   Another understated, nevertheless alarming thought, from the paper itself:   "  Climate is a principal influence in species distributions and ecosystem function, and the disappearance of existing climates, or the development of future climates not found at present, could have profound ecological consequences."
And this headline got my attention too:   "Climate change: study maps those at greatest risk from cyclones and rising seas" ,
In my
, released March 12 from the Yale Center of Environmental Law and Policy's Environmental Attitudes and Behavior Project, says "83 percent of Americans now say global warming is a "serious' problem, up from 70 percent in 2004."   Sea Change in Public Attitudes Toward Global Warming Emerges reads the headline for the press release.   Further:   "  Most dramatically, the survey of 1,000 adults nationwide shows that 63 percent of Americans agree that the United States "is in as much danger from environmental hazards, such as air pollution and global warming, as it is from terrorists.'"
The
, out this past Monday from
Gallup  , is subtitled "Public's concern with attention to environment greater than five years ago."   Most significantly, to me anyway, is that "the environment has reclaimed the top position on Gallup  's ranking of what Americans perceive will be the "most important problem' facing the country 25 years from now."   As Mr. Spock would say:   "
"Of those participating in our nationwide poll, almost 45% considered the development
of alternative energy technologies to be the No. 1 priority for U.S.   policymakers
struggling with the problem of meeting consumption demands, followed next by the
need to control U.S.   energy consumption.   Over two thirds of FPA's ballot participants are for raising oil and gas prices and increasing fuel taxes for all. More than 80% of the voters feel that corporations should be given tax breaks for developing energy-efficient technologies."
Not incidentally, online ballots will be up in the not-too-distant future for all eight of the Foreign Policy Association's
Monday, March 26 11:24 am EST
I've got a lot for respect for activists and what they do.   I was one, and I like to think this blog is a form of activism.   Today I will spare you the call to the barricades but I do want to flag some important programs that are going on and that merit your attention.  
First of all,
was a clarion call on a par with Rachel Carson's Silent Spring .   I have noted his articles in the "NY Review of Books."   On April 14 , coming up very fast , the website notes:   "There are already 1043  events planned in 50  states across the country!"   You can go to the website to get more information, including what events are near you.
The Sierra Club, my environmental activism alma mater , is always in the game.   Their
Are you in high school or college in the U.S. or Canada?   See these folks:  
.   The Earth Institute has been very busy indeed in bringing together major stakeholders and forging important strategies and tactics for dealing with climate change.    
Not incidentally, please let us know about activist efforts in which you are involved.   I have given a mere sampling here.   There's an incredible amount of energy and effort around this issue now.
There's an awful lot to be said for this sort of work.   It is invigorating, you usually meet some great folks, and you get to save the world.    
Recent Articles
