Thursday, May 10 2:40 pm EST
I touched on hydrogen vehicles in my post from April 30  .  I noted a comparison in the “NY Times” of several approaches. Here’s a video  .  Well, I was at the Tribeca Film Festival’s concluding street fair on Saturday and GM had some vehicles on display.  I talked a bit with Raj Choudhury, a project manager for GM.  Here’s a link  to their website’s discussion of advanced technologies, including electric and hybrid vehicles.
These technologies are pretty critical.  I heard Jim Gordon, president of the Cape Wind project, say at the RPA conference last week (see post immediately below) that, after you supplied the needs for household and commercial electricity, with the excess from wind, you could power most of the surface transportation on Cape Cod and the islands if you were using plug-in hybrids.  I’ve been dreaming about just that sort of thing for 30 years.  Sweet.
Meanwhile, I’m a nut for windmills so I couldn’t resist having this picture taken.  It’s not as cool as the one of Stavros Dimas from my recent post on Carbon Expo, but it’s fun.
The big news from GM this week was that they joined the U.S. Climate Action Partnership  , the tremendously influential group of major American companies that have been driving for action on climate change.  They’re the first automaker to join and that’s, as Bernie Sanders might say, “Yoog.”  See this story from Reuters  and the press release from GM  .  I noted a while back that Congressman John Dingell, chair of the House Energy & Commerce Committee, was on board for tough legislation.  He’s been Detroit’s most important champion in Congress for many years and if GM and Dingell are on board, then that’s good news for those pushing for effective federal legislation.  I wrote about Dingell and his critical role here  on March 30.
Saturday, May 5 9:24 pm EST
Since billions of people live in cities, with more coming every day, the infrastructure needed to support them needs building, rebuilding and rehabilitation, expansion and enhancement. There's power generation and transmission, the delivery of drinking water and the treatment of waste water, housing and parks, schools and hospitals, transportation, and commercial and industrial development. All this activity requires energy and energy, as we know, is primarily carbon-based throughout the world. As I pointed out in my post, "
," the Big Apple's carbon dioxide output is on a par with that of Switzerland, Norway and Ireland. New York City has 8.2 million folks with probably 800,000 more on the way in the next several years. The OECD reports that "  60-80% of worldwide energy consumption occurs in urban areas."
T
's annual assembly, focused on the problem of global climate change and how to address it. Robert D. Yaro, RPA's president, said that climate change will influence planning for the foreseeable future. Former New Jersey Governor Jim Florio spoke about the imperatives of minimizing our carbon footprint and said that economic advancement and environmental sensitivity were not incompatible. The present N.J. Governor, Jon Corzine, was to have given the morning's keynote address but, because of a recent terrible car accident in which he was involved, was replaced by Gary D. Rose, the Chief of N.J.'s Office of Economic Development. Corzine has an ambitious
recently. Rose, like Florio, emphasized the opportunity in developing a "clean and green tech economy" and that this sort of activity could "support the next great wave of economic growth."   (See my last post - opportunity  is what I'm seeing, and I'm sure glad that I'm in the company of folks who know their way around high finance, venture capital, and economic development. See also my post from March 9 on "
," and the mention of venture capitalists and their enthusiasm for renewables.)
The Assembly Chairman, Theodore Roosevelt IV, is an investment banker and certainly knows his way around these matters. He's also the Chairman of the Lehman Brothers'
. John Llewellyn, a Kiwi with an impressive track record as an economist at the OECD, and now the Senior Economic Policy Advisor to Lehman Brothers, gave a stunning presentation on the realities of climate change and their implications for corporations. Llewellyn tells CEOs that the science is sound, the climatology is too, that the economic analysis shows that no matter how bravely and well we address global warming, we are going to have impacts:   2 to 3% of global GDP is going to be destroyed by the impacts of climate change annually. (See the Stern Review from the U.K. and its analysis of economic consequences as referenced in
Of Climate Change - Challenges and Opportunities
. (There's that word " opportunity " again.)
There were six breakout sessions:   on carbon markets, protecting water resources under the pressures of climate change, transportation options, siting, green building, and the one I attended, "Tilting at Windmills? Opportunities for Green Power Generation." One of the panelists was Jim Gordon, President of the
project. He reported that NRDC has characterized
Cape Wind as the largest single GHG reduction project in the U.S. He also reported that in the six years that the project has been going through the regulatory process, 20 offshore projects have been built in Europe and 25 more have been approved. He gave us a heads up too to a book that's coming out next week:  
there and they've been looking at the renewable energy potential for   New York City   and have found four main sources:   landfill gas, tidal, wind, and solar photovoltaic. I asked him after the session about whether or not they'd been looking at distributed generation, fuel cells, microturbines and the like, and he said they were working on this now. He further mentioned "microgrids" , "Small networks of power generators in "microgrids' could transform the electricity network in the way that the net changed distributed communication." See
in downtown Manhattan. Maybe I've put a bee in his bonnet.
Mike Bloomberg was the luncheon keynote speaker, promoting PLANYC, and he promised that New York City   was going to become the first truly sustainable American city in the new century  .   He said the stars were aligned and that it was time for action. As I said once before here, quoting Winston Churchill:  "I never worry about action, but only inaction."
is doing a lot of important work. I think this is a compelling thought from the mayor of
Charlotte  , N.C.  :   "We are the ones building roads, designing mass transit, buying the police cars and dump trucks and earth-movers. We're the ones lighting up the earth when you look at those maps from space. Together we have huge purchasing power and if we invest wisely, that can have huge implications for the environment."
I'm going to another exciting event in ten days:   the C40 Large Cities Climate Summit . Much more soon on how cities are approaching the climate change crisis.
The
from Bangkok when it goes online on Friday, and read the summary for policymakers and the speech from the IPCC's head.) There will be a ton of news stories, neither will we lack for analysis and spin.
What we've been hearing all week from the closed-door sessions of the scientists and governmental envoys who've been meeting to finalize the draft report is that, for one thing, China, and its partners in the developing world, are fighting strong language on the requirements for action. See
on this. The developing world actors, India, Brazil and China, chief among them, make the argument that the industrialized world has caused the havoc and it should bear the brunt of the costs for the solutions. I have to wonder at this, not only because the developing world but also countries like the U.S. and Australia are missing the boat, or at least the point:   opportunity  abounds here, there's fruit begging to be picked and eaten. We can make money, jobs, and save the natural environment , it's been proven over and over again. Why would we want to squander the opportunity to live smarter?   Okay, there, I've gotten a little of it out of my system. (Actually, I am a pretty serious student of psychohistory and political psychology and have all sorts of thoughts regarding why societies injure themselves and others. But that's for another venue.)  
There are, of course, vital issues of costs , those to be incurred and those to be avoided by mitigating global climate change. If you look at the
, you will see that economic considerations are front and center. Sections have been written on "cost and benefit concepts," macroeconomic effects," and "economic and other generic policy instruments."   There is some very heavy economic lifting indeed in this report.
The IPCC's judgment is, in the end, a critically important factor but not the final word in any of this. There are, as has been pointed out here, many factors including national and local government actions, the role of business and finance, how science and technology are brought to bear, and public opinion for that matter. These reports this year from the IPCC are, however, a great body of information, nutrient solution for growing good policy at the international level. How the various national actors play all this out bears considerable further attention. This blog will necessarily delve into the roles that China, India, Brazil and other important developing world countries will play. Let's see how tomorrow plays out in Bangkok and pick up the thread again soon on what we are likely to see from these massively important countries.
" about New York City's proposed congestion pricing plan, reports, among other things:   "The value of time lost to congestion delays in the city has been put at five billion dollars annually. When expenses like wasted fuel, lost revenue, and the increased cost of doing business are added in, that figure rises to thirteen billion dollars."
"Sierra" (from the Sierra Club, of course), has a special section
:   "Climate Exchange."   In it, a panel of top experts and policy makers discuss where we are in grappling with the challenges of global warming. The worthies assembled by the Sierra Club include one of the founders of Sun Microsystems; one of the world's leading climatologists; Sen. Barbara Boxer, the chair of the U.S. Senate Environment and Public Works Committee; as well as her senior advisor on climate change; and some others. Coverage at the website includes
Prince Charles at the first
, given on the first day of the summit. (Links are here also to other of Charles's speeches and articles, including on organic farming, historic preservation, and sustainable business.) Charles has been a quiet, forceful, progressive voice in Britain for years. He's also hugely influential. We don't have anyone like him in the
U.S. In any event, it's great to see him so outspoken on climate change.
Monday, April 30 8:49 pm EST
See my colleague Cassandra Clifford's recent two articles on Children and Climate Change.   These, along with the rest of her material, are hard hitting.  Start here . 
I talked about the depth and the intensity of the activity on renewable energy these days in
PepsiCo  , "
. Some articles require a subscription, some don't.)  
Hydrogen for Vehicles  , The Sunday automotive section of the "NY Times" often has some interesting material. Here's a
Germany's New Energy Efficiency Initiative  , In this story from Agence France-Presse (via
, This is a nonprofit that promotes clean energy strategies for powering the state's economy in an environmentally responsible manner. It's one of the hundreds of superb local organizations that have been helping to drive the world's slow but steady progress toward cleaner, cooler energy.   Full disclosure:   The executive director, Michael Vickerman, is an old friend of mine , and he's a dynamo of thoughtfulness and clear-sightedness when it comes to this important work.
This is just a sampler. I will continue to jump in from time to time with more of this sort of melange of news and other items.
I talked about the carbon market, and others, in the post from April 19 aptly named
The other keynote speaker is Yvo de Boer, the Executive Secretary of the
. The website for the conference says:   "Fortunately, there is an increasing number of companies around the world that are facing the realities of this crisis and are leading the way by embracing environmental responsibility."
When this sort of gathering happens, and when corporate bigwigs like the CEOs of Dupont and PG&E, and the Vice Chair of BP America
"O brave new world
Tuesday, April 24 4:35 pm EST
Not having seen this program, I am making no judgements.  However, I have found Frontline to be consistently informative and to the highest journalistic standards.
“ FRONTLINE and the Center for Investigative Reporting go behind the scenes to explore how bi-partisan political and economic forces prevented the U.S. government from confronting what may be one of the most serious problems facing humanity today. The film examines some of the key moments that have shaped the politics of global warming, and how local and state governments and the private sector are now taking bold steps in the absence of federal leadership.” 
9 pm Eastern 
Mike Bloomberg is a billionaire (see
, for " A Greener, Greater New York." He unveiled the plan on Earth Day at the
American   Museum   of Natural History. "With historically low unemployment, a low crime rate and better schools, New York   is thriving , it's a place that people want to be. The time to build on our success is now, and I will not spend my last 984 days in office ignoring the problems that this City will face in the future," said Hizzoner. (You can watch a video by going
Bloomberg's plan is ambitious and, from my perspective, absolutely fabulous. It's also unprecedented in my experience to have a New York City mayor really embrace so many of the ideas that urban environmentalists have been championing for years:   street trees, expanded open space, an emphasis on renewable fuels, energy efficiency and green buildings, distributed generation, mass transportation, brownfield remediation, protecting ambient water and expanding recreational opportunities. So many of New York City  's environmental mandates are dictated by federal and state law. Mayors haven't been able to skirt these. But they've often stinted of their concern. Giuliani wanted to liquidate most of the community gardens and had nothing but contempt for recycling. I was at an American Planning Association convention one year listening to someone from Chicago   talk about Richard Daley's commitment to street trees and urban parks and I just was squirming thinking of my own city. I also remember being in a meeting in 1986 with one of Ed Koch's deputy mayors. A group of us were discussing a state bond proposal to increase spending for open space acquisition. "We don't want new parkland, even if the bond act will pay for it," the deputy mayor told us. "We'd have to spend money on upkeep if we did."   I wrote a magazine article for the twentieth anniversary of Earth Day in 1990 which, in essay form, was later published by the American Planning Association.
is  a sort of urban environmental utopia. I always thought that the Big Apple's politicians could never really think this way. Mike's making a monkey out of me, and I love it.
Here's one big-ticket item:   plant a million trees!   Sweet. "Beyond aesthetics and emotional well-being, trees perform important functions that protect and enhance city dwellers' health and property. Trees literally clean the air by absorbing air pollutants and releasing oxygen. They reduce stormwater runoff and erosion; they temper climate; they can save energy; they create wildlife habitat; they can improve health, serve as screens, and strengthen community. They can even help contribute to a community's economy and way of life."   The USDA
on the benefits of the urban forest.
Another initiative in the plan is congestion pricing.  I mentioned this in my post immediately below, under the heading How Green is Your City?      The pushback is already coming on strong. See
works!   It can and should in the Big Apple. (For critics of congestion pricing as an "elitist" measure, consider London Mayor Ken Livingstone's politics. They don't call him Red Ken for nothing.)
So here's the part that's most germane for this little sector of the blogosphere:   the plan has a significant
. Fun fact:   The sheer scale of our city means that New York emits nearly 60 million metric tons of carbon dioxide annually, slightly more than Switzerland and Norway and slightly less than Ireland. We're looking now for a 30% reduction from the 2005 baseline by 2030. The idea is to get reductions of 33.6 million tons - 10.8 million tons coming from "clean power," 16.7 million from "efficient buildings," 6.1 from "sustainable transportation," plus an additional 15.6 million avoided by accommodating 900,000 people in New York City   or "avoided sprawl" as the Plan terms it. Plus, the City will devise a comprehensive plan for dealing with weather impacts that are likely to come no matter how negatively or positively global warming trends. This is all heady stuff.
" next month. "Cities are responsible for three-quarters of the world's energy consumption, and as such, the world's largest cities have a critical role to play in the reduction of carbon emissions and the reversal of dangerous climate change," says their website.
I'll let the Mayor get the last word in here. He's earned it, for my money, with this plan. "Climate change is a national challenge, and meeting it requires strong and united national leadership. The fact is, the emerging consensus among scientists is that, to avoid serious harm, we must reduce our emissions by 60 to 80 percent by 2050."
There were a number of developments this past week  worth noting. Here’s a rundown:
U.N. Security Council - On Tuesday, Britain, holding the  rotating presidency of the Security Council, brought the issue of  climate change forward. (See this from “The International Herald Tribune” and this from the BBC.) The U.K.’s Foreign Secretary,  Margaret Beckett, for five years her country’s lead climate change  negotiator, said: “There are few greater potential threats to our  economies, too, but also to peace and security itself.” (See the Stern Report for further background on her  reference to the world’s economies.) Beckett gave a speech the night  before to the Foreign Policy Association and its partners titled “ Climate Change - The Gathering Storm .” She concluded  by saying: “Now it is time for us to rise to our newest and biggest  challenge: to fight the first great war of interdependence, the struggle  for climate security.”
At the  Security Council on Tuesday, there was a considerable push back by  developing nations. China’s delegate didn’t quite  see it the way  that Beckett did. Ambassador Liu Zhenmin asserted, “Developing countries  believe that neither has the Security Council the professional  competence, nor is it the right decision making place for extensive  participation leading up to widely acceptable proposals.” The “ Times of India ” reported:  “Indian  ambassador to the UN Nirupam Sen rubbished the idea that climate change  presented any kind of imminent security issue that the Security Council  should deal with.” Ouch.
UNSG  Ban Ki-Moon playing conciliator, as is appropriate, had this to say:   “We must focus more clearly on the benefits of early action. The  resources of civil society and the private sector must be brought  in. And this Council has a role to play in working with other competent  intergovernmental bodies to address the possible root causes of conflict  discussed today.”
For  some more perspectives from journalists from China, Brazil, India,  Indonesia and elsewhere, go to PostGlobal .
U.S.   Security Concerns  , Last Monday, the non-profit CNA Corporation,  issued a report called “ National Security and the Threat of Climate Change .”  The report was prepared by some serious former American military top  brass. The website says:  “Global climate change presents a serious  national security threat which could impact Americans at home, impact United  States military operations and heighten global tensions ”  That’s unequivocal. General Gordon Sullivan, Chairman of CNAC’s Military  Advisory Board, followed up with a release applauding the Security  Council’s activity on the subject (see item above) and then testified  before the “Select Committee On Energy Independence And Global Warming”  in the House Of Representatives. (Their website is pending.) He  testified:  “After listening to leaders of the scientific, business, and  governmental communities both I and my colleagues came to agree that  Global Climate Change is and will be a significant threat to our  National Security and in a larger sense to life on earth as we know it  to be.” One more radical leftist tree hugger on record. (See my post “ If You Don’t Like Al Gore, Then )   A “NY Times” editorial from yesterday included this zinger:  “In an alliance of denial, China  and the United States are using each other’s  inaction as an excuse to do nothing.”
On the subject of climate change  and conflict, I want to refer you to the excellent work of the Environmental Change and Security  Program (ECSP) of the Woodrow  Wilson International Center  for Scholars. They’ve been at this work since 1994. As a student of the  etiology of conflict, I can tell you that this is a critical area of  inquiry. See also the seminal work of Thomas Homer-Dixon , the  director of the Trudeau Centre for Peace and Conflict Studies in Toronto.  Finally, my colleague, Bonnie Boyd, the blogger on Central  Asia, has been writing a series of important articles on  environmental issues and impacts. Start here:  Central Asia & Climate change: Overview .
IPCC , On North American  Climate  , As a follow-up to the IPCC report from April 6 , see  my post “Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability” , regional  briefings have been given all over the world. The one for North America  was given in Washington on Monday. See this coverage from “ABC News” for  example , “ Global Warming May Put U.S. in Hot  Water .” Another news organization, McClatchy  Newspapers, reported here :  “More droughts, floods, heat  waves, infectious diseases and extinctions are possible for two of the  most prosperous countries on the planet ” One of the lead authors,  Michael Oppenheimer, put it this way:  “Water at large is  the central (global warming) problem for the U.S.” (The North American  section of the report has not yet been posted at the IPCC website but  should appear here when it does,  soon one presumes.)  Another of the lead authors, Cynthia  Rosenzweig, talked to WNYC radio last week:  “ Ground Water: Climate Change Could Flood Subways .” This sort of  flooding, not incidentally, was the theme of the event I attended last  Saturday, the Sea of People  , part of the national Step It Up  campaign. (See my post on it below.)
How Green is Your City?   , This is a new book  from SustainLane, “the first internet and media company  dedicated to empowering consumers, businesses and government to go  green.” Their 2006 US City Sustainability rankings are contained in a  new book. You can find a great teaser for the book here . #1 sustainable city?  Portland,  Oregon. No surprise there.
How’d  my home town, New York City perform? #6 on the list! Mayor Bloomberg is  going to have a big speech for tomorrow, Earth Day, on how we are going  forward in all this. One of the newsiest components for his speech is on his embrace of congestion pricing . London’s  certainly had great  success . You go, Mike!  (I’ve been saying this for years  and years, before the term congestion pricing was even coined.)
The new  Governor of New York State, Eliot Spitzer, put out his comprehensive plan for energy and the environment ,  on April 19. The reviews from environmentalists were enthusiastic. NRDC  energy expert Ashok Gupta said: “Governor Spitzer’s commitment to  energy efficiency will make New York the benchmark against which all  other states will be measured.”
Media Notes
“Newsweek”  and “MSNBC.com” have devoted a huge amount of coverage recently to  climate change. See their website “ Learning to Live with Global Warming ”  which has a great body of useful material.
“NY  Times” foreign affairs columnist, Thomas Friedman, made a big splash  this week with a cover story in their magazine:  “ The Power of Green .” There’s more:   a Discovery Channel series on energy with Friedman starting  tonight:  “ Green: The New, Red, White and Blue .”  Here’s some commentary on  Friedman’s magazine article from Harvey Wasserman at the Huff Po.
Not Incidentally, Comments  -   Dear Reader, you are cordially invited to make comment at this  website on this or any of the posts. One of the principal reasons the  Foreign Policy Association has created this blog and its seven sister  blogs is to provide not only some ongoing information on the subject at  hand but also to engage you in a dialogue. We really do want to hear  what you have to say. Feel free.
Thursday, April 19 2:25 pm EST
I went to a hugely informative event yesterday. It focused on the "carbon markets" and was organized by the non-profit
What's a carbon market you ask? Well, that's a good question. There are quite a few dimensions to this area. "In addition to setting emission limits, the Kyoto Protocol provides several market-based mechanisms to enable GHG emitters to achieve their assigned reductions. The basic idea, trading emission rights, has been successfully implemented for other pollutants in many countries. Under this system, because some countries will be able to reduce emissions more easily and cheaply than other countries (for example through forest-based carbon offset projects), they can sell their surplus reductions (or carbon credits) to countries that emit more than their limit. This will enable achieving the overall global  emissions target at the least cost. Carbon projects can therefore generate financing for conservation by selling certified carbon credits to GHG emitters." (This is from the
One of the progenitors of the "cap-and-trade" system that allows polluters to accumulate "credits" is Environmental Defense, back when they were the Environmental Defense Fund. The system was conceived with sulfur dioxide in mind. Acid rain is largely a consequence of sulfur dioxide emissions from electrical and industrial power plants. The push for this system to be deployed within the acid rain title of the Clean Air Act reauthorization was led by EDF. See "
, said that after Kyoto when the Europeans were looking for compliance mechanisms, they were urged by Clinton and Gore to adopt a "cap-and-trade" system because of the success of the acid rain program in the U.S. Now the Europeans are vigorously briefing members of Congress and staff, as well as legislative and executive branch leaders and staff in California, about how it all works in Europe. See
" from Environmental Defense. Of the four principles, one is about the cap and two are about trade.
Carbon markets, mostly in Europe, have been growing:   trading $11 billion in 2005, $30 billion in 2006. Obviously, with the new proposals from the E.U. and from Britain (see my post on the
in the east leading the way, the markets are going to explode in size.
So, you've got the "regulated" markets where requirements have been instituted on emissions and credits are traded. But you've also got the "voluntary" markets. In brief, according to
from the International Institute for Environment and Development : "The voluntary market refers to entities (companies, governments, NGOs, individuals) that purchase carbon credits for purposes other than meeting regulatory targets." You can, for instance, offset the GHG burden of your roundtrip vacation flights. You go to a provider who then takes the amount of money that has been calculated to offset the carbon expenditure you've made and applies it to some worthy project. I referenced this sort of activity in my post on the "
, a terrific resource.)      Here's another fun bit from yesterday:   Distinctions are made in all of this between "commodity" carbon and "gourmet" (or "pretty" or "charismatic") carbon. In other words, individuals and companies may wish to buy into projects that some may deem "prettier" (rainforest or coral reef protection, for instance) so that they feel as if they're getting more "green" for their greenbacks (or euros or yen). Companies may tend this way because of the greenwash value or the enhancement they feel that may accrue to their corporate social responsibility (CSR) profile. To be sure, this is a consideration that has grown enormously in importance for top corporate management and their boards.  
Another worthy from yesterday's panel, Gia Schneider from Credit Suisse, pointed out that there are opportunities  for companies in GHG reduction and they are finding more and more of them. Energy efficiency and renewable energy initiatives, the most salient examples, bring costs down. Here's a good example from the BBC:   "
, for instance, will help your business, as will hundreds of other consultants. As RMI puts it:   "Advanced techniques for resource productivity can now greatly reduce environmental impacts while providing superior goods and services at lower cost."
Let me note one more comment from another of yesterday's panelists, an old-timer like me, Skip Rankin from the law firm,
. He said he'd been involved for 20 years in renewable energy projects and was pleasantly astonished to be seeing the intense level of activity that he's seeing now. (I said in my post on Renewable Energy below that I myself felt like Rip Van Winkle with everything taking off as it is). Skip's involved in creating contractual standards for carbon transactions. Not incidentally, a great resource on climate change and the law is the ABA. Their forthcoming book,
, was edited by an old and good acquaintance - and easily one of the most prolific writers and editors I've ever known - Mike Gerrard. (My post below on the "Business of Green" also references an informative article from the "NY Times" on the law and climate change.)
As yesterday's symposium and one of the panelists in particular made abundantly clear:   "The game is already on." The markets are here, and they are going to grow enormously. Theoretically, they should greatly enhance the process of reducing greenhouse gases thereby diminishing the chances of catastrophic climate change.
Recent Articles
