News, Opinion, Analysis
Recent Comments
Member since 05/2005
In case you missed it , CO2 and etc is pollution:
The Supreme Court ordered the federal government on Monday to take a fresh look at regulating carbon dioxide emissions from cars, a rebuke to Bush administration policy on global warming.
In a 5-4 decision, the court said the Clean Air Act gives the Environmental Protection Agency the authority to regulate the emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases from cars.
Greenhouse gases are air pollutants under the landmark environmental law, Justice John Paul Stevens said in his majority opinion.
The court's four conservative justices -- Chief Justice John Roberts and Justices Samuel Alito, Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas -- dissented.
Whether you are a conservative or liberal economist you should think that CO2 is a pollutant, since it is an outcome of production and consumption that harms a third party (i.e., it is a negative externality). This gives government the, er, obligation to regulate to improve economic efficiency (i.e., social welfare).
Posted by John Whitehead on April 02, 2007 at 01:18 PM in Climate Change |  Permalink
I thought all economists were apolitical.
Alright, alright, I'll say it: go Buckeyes. What's the emoticon for grumble?
Best,
Greenspan? apolitical?
Scalia's dissent included a rather convoluted argument that even though carbon dioxide is a chemical substance emitted into the air, it's still not an "agent" of air pollution because "air pollution" really means pollution of the air at ground level.  (As he is wont to do, he supports this position largely by reference to Webster's New International Dictionary 1910 (2d ed. 1949).)  Check it out, it's kind of awkward.
Carbon dioxide is no more a pollutant than oxygen or water.  Each is a crucial part of our ecosystem, and changing the amounts of the substances in our air can lead to dramatic change.  If instead of carbon dioxide we greatly increased the amount of oxygen in the air by our actions, the results would be drastic.  If water levels rose by 20 meters at our coastlines, the results would be catastrophic.  But you wouldn't call oxygen or water a pollutant.
Of course, this doesn't mean we shouldn't worry about it.
"Carbon dioxide is no more a pollutant than oxygen or water."
Ever hear of 'Thermal Pollution'? Water can very well be regulated as a pollutant, especially water of different properties than the water surrounding it. No one argues the negative effects of thermal pollution, either. It can harm fish spawning and living conditions, promote excessive algal blooms, and even clog intakes down-river due to promotion of invertebrate growth.
Similarly, output of CO2 as a material may not be a pollutant, BUT CO2 above the prevailing PPM (or general environmental concentration) can very well be counted as a pollutant, for much the same reasons.
And here marks the beginning of the end of the Clean air act and the EPA...
Can't say I will morn thier passing.
... because Blogads are good for you.
Search
-- Economic Way of Thinking
-- UKNEE
-- The Olive Ridley Crawl
-- Mark C R UK
-- American Institute of Biological Sciences
-- Fritz
... the Environmental Economics blog ... is now the default homepage on my browser (but then again, I guess I am a wonk -- a word I learned on the E.E. blog). That is a very nice service to the profession.
-- Anonymous
"... I try and read the blog everyday and have pointed it out to other faculty who have their students read it for class. It is truly one of the best things in the blogosphere."
-- Anonymous
