News, Opinion, Analysis
Recent Comments
September 18, 2006
We've talked a lot in the past about the Coase Theorem and how it should work.  The idea is simple: If  property rights can be well defined and if  there are no impediments to bargaining, polluters and victims should be able to negotiate a settlement that is in everyone's best interest.  That's how it should work...but as we all know, how things should work and how they do are often very different.
From the Sunday Columbus Dispatch:
When Daniel Paul Stinson looks out his back door, he sees nothing but the Gen. James M. Gavin [owned by American Electric Power] power plant.
With two of my three kids diagnosed with asthma--the only one not is the gymnast who spends most of her exercise time indoors--I started wondering where I could go to breath clean air.  Here's Money Magazine's list of the top 25 cities ranked by percentage of 'good' air quality days.   The lowest on the list of top 25 has good air days 95.3% of the time.  We here in the greater Columbus, OH area have good air 33.7% of the time.  Damned coal power.
Posted by Tim Haab on July 18, 2006 at 12:37 PM in Air Quality |  Permalink |  Comments (6)
I'm obsessed.  Last week I posted about my views on indoor smoking bans.  My confusion troubles me because I can't figure out why the market didn't solve the issue long ago...if the demand for nonsmoking establishments is so great, why didn't some bar/restaurant owners go smoke free for profit?  But, outdoor smoking, now there's something I can talk about.  Restaurants and bars have walls to help define property rights, beaches and parks don't.  So who has the property rights over the air along a beach? It looks like nonsmokers are going to win this battle...at least in San Diego :
Worried about the health effects of secondhand smoke and sick of cleaning up discarded cigarettes, San Diego has banned smoking at its beaches and parks. The city joins nearly 2,300 other municipalities across the nation that have barred smoking in a variety of public places.
Don't go to the Smoky Mountains expecting clean, mountain air :
A pollution advisory was issued Thursday in Great Smoky Mountains National Park warning visitors of unhealthy levels of ground-level ozone.
At the Great Smoky Mountains National Park, ozone concentrations exceeding health standards were recorded overnight Wednesday at two higher elevation monitoring stations and conditions were expected to continue Thursday.
This would mark the third unhealthy day of the 2006 summer ozone season in the Smokies, the country's most visited national park on the Tennessee-North Carolina border.
I like my title, but does ozone=haze?
Posted by John Whitehead on June 22, 2006 at 03:52 PM in Air Quality |  Permalink |  Comments (4)
From the NC Conservation Network:
A bill is introduced in the NC House and Senate to adopt clean car standards in NC: H2185/S1560, Low-Emission Vehicles.  The bills have been referred to the respective House and Senate environmental committees.
The idea is to adopt California clean car standards. From H2185 :
The Department, in consultation with the Department of Environment and Natural Resources, shall adopt rules to prohibit the transfer of motor vehicles or motor vehicle engines that are not in compliance with G.S. 143‑215.107E if the rules are necessary to achieve equivalence with the low‑emission vehicle program established under the laws of the State of California.(d)  A person shall not transfer or attempt to transfer a motor vehicle or motor vehicle engine that is subject to but does not comply with G.S. 143‑215.107E.
I seriously doubt that this will pass in NC this year, but I wouldn't be surprised if something like it passes within the next 5 years.
Posted by John Whitehead on June 07, 2006 at 10:09 PM in Air Quality |  Permalink |  Comments (0)
New Hampshire is mandating a cut in mercury emissions at its power plant -- 80 percent by 2013. Any reduction beyond 80 percent can be used to bank against future SO2 emissions (acid rain, smog). The greenies are mad:
[Doug] Bogen [of Clean Water Action] said this is the first state in the country to allow credits from one pollutant to be traded for reductions of another.
“Certainly this is a bad precedent. We are giving them back the credits we took away from them four years ago,” Bogen said.
I don't really blame them this time. I've never heard of banking one pollutant for another. But then, I don't know everything.
Could it be that mercury stays in-state and SO2 bothers Maine but not New Hampshire? Just wondering. Live free or die!
Posted by John Whitehead on May 31, 2006 at 09:59 AM in Air Quality |  Permalink |  Comments (4)
In a recent interview, Philip Verleger --former member of the President's Council of Economic Advisors under Carter-- claims that relaxing environmental rules today will lower the price of gas (I believe that), increase pollution today (I believe that) and somehow magically create the incentive to build more ethanol refineries and lower pollution in the long-run (I don't believe that).
Michigan wants to cut mercury emissions past Bush admin goals ( Granholm orders ...*):
Michigan electric companies are being ordered to slash mercury emissions from coal-burning power plants by 90 percent within nine years, a step toward cleansing the state's waters of a poison that has prompted fish consumption warnings.
Gov. Jennifer Granholm on Monday said the Department of Environmental Quality would develop a rule requiring utilities to achieve the reductions by 2015.
The state policy goes beyond mercury reduction standards announced by the Bush administration last year. The federal goal is to cut mercury pollution 70 percent nationwide by 2018, although the DEQ says Michigan probably would see little if any reduction until 2025 or later.
Following up on the Krugman post on Exxon and global warming, Scientific American's blog discusses the extent to which climate models have been tested against the data and summarizes recent research on this issue indicating the problem may be more severe than present models suggest. This post notes, briefly, the similarity between monetary policy and policy to address global warming when model uncertainty is present and has a summary of the Scientific American discussion.
Posted by Mark Thoma on April 18, 2006 at 01:07 AM in Air Quality |  Permalink |  Comments (4)
Search
-- Economic Way of Thinking
-- UKNEE
-- The Olive Ridley Crawl
-- Mark C R UK
-- American Institute of Biological Sciences
-- Fritz
... the Environmental Economics blog ... is now the default homepage on my browser (but then again, I guess I am a wonk -- a word I learned on the E.E. blog). That is a very nice service to the profession.
-- Anonymous
"... I try and read the blog everyday and have pointed it out to other faculty who have their students read it for class. It is truly one of the best things in the blogosphere."
-- Anonymous
