PIM 8
or Director of Classification, Compensation, and HRIS – ext. 2895
1.   General
a.   This  information provides guidance to be used when seeking the employment of  temporary staff employees to be paid from Non-Student Temporary Employee wage  funds (Account #: 915900) or from vacant permanent SPA staff positions (Account  #: 912100) or from vacant permanent EPA  staff positions (Account #:  911100). This guidance does not apply to the appointment/employment of temporary  (part-time) teaching faculty (Account #: 913100).
b.   Individuals who are employed  as permanent or probationary employees (full-time or part-time) may not be  employed concurrently as temporary staff employees except   when  such employment is  occasional or sporadic and in a different capacity (different general  occupational category) from their regular employment. Additional employment in  the same capacity (within the same general occupational category) may be  considered overtime and is subject to the hours of work and overtime  compensation provisions of the State Personnel Manual and/or the Fair Labor  Standards Act.                                    
c.   Temporary staff employees are  hired on an "as needed" basis subject to:
1. the availability of funds  sufficient to cover the costs associated with the employment, or
2. the availability of a  vacant permanent staff position, and
3. duration of employment  limitations.
2.  Duration of Employment           
The duration of employment for temporary staff employees is  limited by the State Personnel  Commission as a means of controlling discrimination with  regard to entitlements to leave, medical, and  retirement benefits. Temporary staff employees have  no benefit entitlements.
a.   Temporary employees who are  hired to work a regular schedule of 19 hours or less per week may  be employed for periods of up  to 12 months. Such employment may be renewed indefinitely for  additional periods of up to  12 months.
b.   Temporary employees who are  hired to work an irregular or intermittent schedule may be  employed for periods of up to  12 months. The hours worked may not exceed 988 hours during  any 12 month period. Such  employment may be renewed indefinitely for additional periods of up  to 12 months.
c.   Temporary employees who are  hired to work a regular schedule of 20 or more hours per week  may be employed for periods  up to six months. When sufficiently justified, an extension of the  employment period for up to  five additional months (total employment period of 11 months) may be requested,  with a twelfth month subject to prior approval by Human Resources, but in no  case shall the period of temporary employment at 20 or more hours per  week exceed a total of 12  months.
d.   Temporary employees initially  hired to work a regular schedule of 20 or more hours per week may  have their employment  converted to an irregular or intermittent schedule at any time as long as the  hours worked do not exceed  988 hours during any 12 month period. The employee is eligible for renewed  temporary employment.
e. Appointment to  vacant permanent SPA positions for specified periods of less than six months are  considered temporary  appointments. Appointments for specified periods of six months and longer (up to  a maximum period of two years) are permanent time-limited appointments. (See PIM-43 , Recruitment and Selection of  Employees subject to the State Personnel Act)  .
f.    Appointments to vacant  permanent EPA staff positions for specified periods of less than six months  are considered temporary  appointments. Appointments for specific periods of six months or longer are  permanent appointments.    
g.   Temporary employees who are  hired to work temporarily in a vacant permanent position may be appointed for no  less than two weeks.
3.  Payment   
Hourly temporary employees will be paid once each month on  the last workday prior to the 16th for hours worked during the preceding month.  Salaried temporary employees will be paid semi-monthly on the last business day  prior to the 16
th
4.   Required Processing       
All temporary staff employees are required to complete the  proper documentation through the  Human Resources Department (222 King Building).
a.   Establish employment  eligibility and identity in compliance with the Immigration Reform and  Control Act of 1986,  (completing the USCIS Form I-9). This action must be completed prior to, or  concurrent with, the beginning of employment. Failure to complete the form  within the first three  days of employment will result in termination.
b.  Employees are  strongly encouraged to present an original social security card during initial  employment processing. This action will assure accurate payroll tax reporting.
c.   Complete federal and state  tax withholding forms (W-4/NC-4).
d.  Complete a  Criminal Background Check consent agreement.
e.  Complete  verification of US employment authorization via DHS E-Verify system.
f. Obtain a copy of  the "Conditions of Employment Applicable to All Temporary Staff Members".
g. Temporary staff  employees will be given an I-9 verification card indicating they have completed  all processing requirements.
5.  Equal Employment Opportunity           
a.   The  Equal Employment Opportunity requirements applicable to the employment of  permanent and  probationary employees apply equally to the employment of temporary employees  except that no  formal  advertisement or applicant pool are required in order to make a selection.
b.   The employment decision may  not be based on impermissible factors such as gender, age, race, national  origin, or religion.
c. Relatives or  other close personal relationships may not be employed within the same  department or office  if such employment will result in one family member being in a position to  influence employment  decisions directly or indirectly affecting another family member.
6.  Benefits    
7.  Records     
a.   A personnel records folder is  established and maintained in the Human Resources Department for all  temporary staff employees  paid from Non-Student Temporary Employee wage funds and vacant permanent SPA and  EPA positions.
b.   Other files may be  established and maintained for temporary staff employees at the discretion of  the appropriate vice  chancellor, associate vice chancellor, dean, director, or department/office  head.
8.  Qualifications       
Temporary employees must meet the minimum eligibility  requirements established for the type of work they  will be performing. Minimum age for temporary employees is  18.
9.  Salary        
a.   Unless an exemption is  required and approved, all temporary staff employees are subject to the   wage  and hour (overtime) provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act and thus are paid  on an hourly basis as determined from the regular submission of time records to  indicate hours worked. The hourly rate of pay is determined by a Personnel  Analyst in the Human Resources Department from  an analysis of the duties and responsibilities as described  on the Temporary Staff Employment Authorization Request  .  Work in excess of 40 hours per week must be compensated at the overtime rate of  time and one-half.
b.   The minimum hourly rate for  temporary staff positions is normally 1/2080th of the annual hiring rate for  Grade 50 on State of North Carolina Salary Schedule However. When the duties  include no more than one primary task, a rate between the Federal minimum wage  rate and the State minimum  may be proposed based on the  type of job and necessary knowledge, skills, and abilities. For additional  information concerning appropriate wage rates, please contact the Human  Resources Department at ext. 2276.
c.   For temporary employees  performing professional-level duties, the department or office head may request  FLSA exempt status by including a completed PD Form 541 (Federal Wage and Hour Exemption  Determination Form)  with the PD Form 17 that is submitted to  the Human Resources Department. The information provided by the department or  office will be reviewed   by  the Director of Classification & Compensation and compared against applicable  FLSA guidelines. The resulting determination will be communicated to the  department or office head.
d.   If FLSA exempt status is  determined, then a salary for the period of anticipated employment is  determined and automatically  distributed to the employee on a semi-monthly basis without submission  of time records. Failure to  notify the Payroll Office of early termination may result in a paycheck  issued for work not  performed.
10.  Procedures         
The following procedures apply in the hiring of temporary  staff employees.
a.   Prepare a PD Form 17 (Temporary Staff Employment Authorization  Request)  in accordance with the instructions included with the  form and submit the form with appropriate enclosures to the Human Resources  Department.
b.   Upon notification of approval  from the Temporary Employment Coordinator, advise the selected applicant  to report to the Human  Resources Department for employment processing.
c.   CAUTION: Do not allow the selected  applicant to begin work until required processing through  the Human Resources  Department has been completed. The supervisor may be personally liable (which  may include compensating the  employee from personal funds) if a temporary employee performs  services before all required  processing is complete. The Human Resources Department provides all  applicants, upon completion  of required in processing, a checklist card that shows they are cleared  to begin work. Supervisors  should check the applicant's card to assure required processing has  been completed.
11.  Terminations      
a.   When completing the Temporary  Staff Employment Authorization Request, the  department or office head identifies both an employment  date and a termination date. The  termination date is effectively used as the termination of  payroll activity for the temporary  employee.
b.   Any extension of temporary  staff employment requires submission and approval of another PD Form 17. If a  temporary employee is allowed by his or her supervisor to work beyond the  specified termination date,  this would constitute unauthorized employment. In this situation, the  supervising official who  signs the individual time record may incur financial obligation or  disciplinary consequences for  such an action.
c.   Temporary staff employees are  considered to be "at will" employees and may have their  employment terminated at any  time by the appropriate department or office head. If a decision is  made to terminate prior to  the date specified on the PD Form 17, such decisions are to be  communicated to the employee  in writing with copies of the correspondence to the Human Resources Department  and the Payroll Office. Prompt communication of this action is essential to the  payroll process, particularly  when the temporary employee has FLSA exempt status.
