This guide is provided for your information and convenience only. It is not a legal document. For complete information, refer to the Employment Standards Act, 2000 and its regulations .
Termination of Employment Defined
A number of expressions are commonly used to describe situations when employment is terminated. These include "let go," "discharged," "dismissed," "fired" and "permanently laid off."
Under the Employment Standards Act, 2000 ( ESA ) a person's employment is terminated if the employer:
dismisses or stops employing an employee, including an employee who is no longer employed due to the bankruptcy or insolvency of the employer;
" constructively" dismisses an employee and the employee resigns, in response,  within a reasonable time;
lays an employee off for a period that is longer than a " temporary layoff ".
In most cases, when an employer ends the employment of an employee who has been continuously employed for three months, the employer must provide the employee with either written notice of termination, termination pay or a combination  (as long as the notice and the termination pay together equal the length of notice the employee is entitled to receive).
An employer is not required to give an employee a reason why his or her employment is being terminated.  There are, however, some situations where an employer cannot  terminate an employee's employment even if the employer is prepared to give proper written notice or termination pay.  For example, an employer cannot end someone's employment, or penalize them in any way, if any part of the reason for the termination of employment is based on the employee asking questions about the ESA  or exercising a right under the ESA , such as refusing to work in excess of the daily or weekly hours of work maximums, or taking a leave of absence specified in the ESA .   Please see the chapter on Reprisals .
Qualifying for Termination Notice or Pay in Lieu
Certain employees are not entitled to notice of termination or termination pay under the ESA .  Examples include: employees who are guilty of wilful misconduct, disobedience, or wilful neglect of duty that is not trivial and has not been condoned by the employer.  Other examples include construction employees, employees on temporary layoff, employees who refuse an offer of reasonable alternative employment and employees who have been employed less than three months.
The termination-of-employment rules are entirely separate from any entitlements an employee may have to be paid severance pay under the ESA  .
Constructive Dismissal
A constructive dismissal may occur when an employer makes a significant change to a fundamental term or condition of an employee's employment without the employee's actual or implied consent.
For example, an employee may be constructively dismissed if the employer makes changes to the employee's terms and conditions of employment that result in a significant reduction in salary or a significant change in such things as the employee's work location, hours of work, authority, or position.  Constructive dismissal may also include situations where an employer harasses or abuses an employee, or an employer gives an employee an ultimatum to "quit or be fired" and the employee resigns in response.
The employee would have to resign in response to the significant change within a reasonable period of time in order for the employer's actions to be considered a termination of employment for purposes of the ESA .
Constructive dismissal is a complex and difficult subject. For more information on constructive dismissal please contact the Employment Standards Information Centre, 1-800-531-5551.
Temporary Layoff
An employee is on temporary layoff when an employer cuts back or stops the employee's work without ending his or her employment ( e.g. , laying someone off at times when there is not enough work to do). An employer may put an employee on a temporary layoff without specifying a date on which the employee will be recalled to work.
For the purposes of the termination provisions of the ESA , a "week of layoff" is a week in which the employee earned less than half of what he or she would ordinarily earn (or earns on average) in a week.
A week of layoff does not include any week in which the employee did not work for one or more days because the employee was not able or available to work, was subject to disciplinary suspension, or was not provided with work because of a strike or lockout.
Employers are not required under the ESA  to provide employees with a written notice of a temporary layoff, nor do they have to produce a reason.  They may, however, be required to do these things under a collective agreement or an employment contract.
Under the ESA , a “temporary layoff” can last:
not more than 13 weeks of layoff in any period of 20 consecutive weeks;
or
more than 13 weeks in any period of 20 consecutive weeks, but less than 35 weeks of layoff in any period of 52 consecutive weeks, where:
the employee continues to receive substantial payments from the employer;
or
the employer continues to make payments for the benefit of the employee under a legitimate group or employee insurance plan (such as a medical or drug insurance plan) or a legitimate retirement or pension plan;
or
or
the employee would be entitled  to receive supplementary unemployment benefits but isn't receiving them because he or she is employed elsewhere;
or
the employer recalls the employee to work within the time frame approved by the Director of Employment Standards;
or
the employer recalls the employee within the time frame set out in an agreement with an employee who is not represented by a trade union;
or
a layoff longer than a layoff described in 'B' where the employer recalls an employee who is represented by a trade union within the time set out in an agreement between the union and the employer.
If an employee is laid off for a period longer than a temporary layoff as set out above, the employer is considered to have terminated the employee's employment. Generally, the employee will then be entitled to termination pay.
Written Notice of Termination and Termination Pay
Under the ESA:
an employer can terminate the employment of an employee who has been employed continuously for three months or more if the employer has given the employee proper written notice  of termination and the notice period has expired;
or
an employer can terminate the employment of an employee without  written notice or with less  notice than is required if the employer pays termination pay  to the employee.
Written Notice of Termination
When an employee is terminated, the written notice required under the ESA  is generally determined by how long someone has been employed by an employer.
Notice of termination of employment, once given, cannot be withdrawn without the consent of the employee.
The following chart specifies the periods of statutory notice required.
Length of Employment
1 week
2 weeks
3 weeks
4 weeks
5 weeks
6 weeks
7 weeks
8 weeks
Note: Special rules determine the amount of notice required in the case of mass terminations - where 50 or more employees are terminated at an employer's establishment within a four-week period.
Requirements During the Statutory Notice Period
During the statutory notice period, an employer must:
not reduce the employee's wage rate or alter a term or condition of employment;
continue to make whatever contributions would be required to maintain the employee's benefits plans; and
pay the employee the wages he or she is entitled to, which cannot be less than the employee's regular wages  for a regular work week  each week.
Regular Rate
This is an employee's rate of pay for each non-overtime hour of work in the employee's work week.
Regular Wages
These are wages other than overtime pay, vacation pay, public holiday pay, premium pay, termination pay and severance pay and certain contractual entitlements.
Regular Work Week
For an employee who usually works the same number of hours every week, a regular work week is a week of that many hours, not including overtime hours.
Some employees do not have a regular work week. That is, they do not work the same number of hours every week or they are paid on a basis other than time. For these employees, the "regular wages" for a "regular work week" is the average amount of the regular wages earned by the employee in the 12 weeks in which the employee worked immediately preceding the date the notice was given.
An employer is not allowed to reduce an employee's entitlement to wages by scheduling an employee's vacation time during the statutory notice period unless the employee-- after  receiving written notice of termination of employment--agrees to take his or her vacation time during the notice period.
If an employer provides longer notice than is required, the statutory part of the notice period is the last part of the period that ends on the date of termination.
How to Provide Written Notice
In most cases, written notice of termination of employment must be addressed to the employee. It can be provided in person or by mail, fax or e-mail, as long as delivery can be verified.
There are special rules for providing notice of termination if an employee has a contract of employment or a collective agreement that provides seniority rights, allowing an employee who is laid off or terminated to displace ("bump") other employees.
In that case, the employer must post a notice in the workplace (where it will be seen by the employees) setting out the names, seniority and job classification of those employees the employer intends to terminate and the date of the proposed termination. The posting of the notice is considered to be notice of termination, as of the date of the posting, to an employee who is named in the notice. However, this notice of termination must still meet the length requirements set out in the ESA .
If an employee exercises his or her bumping rights, the posting of the notice will be considered to be notice of termination, as of the date of the posting, to any employee "bumped" out of his or her job by the employee named in the notice.
There are also special rules regarding how notice is provided when there is a mass termination .
Termination Pay
An employee who does not receive the  written notice required under the ESA  must be given termination pay in lieu of notice.  Termination pay is a lump sum payment equal to the regular wages  for a regular work week  that an employee would otherwise have been entitled to during the written notice period.  An employee  earns vacation pay on his or her termination pay. Employers must also continue to make whatever contributions would be required to maintain the benefits the employee would have been entitled to had he or she continued to be employed through the notice period.
Regular work week
Sarah has worked for three and a half years. Now her job has been eliminated and her employment has been terminated. Sarah was not given any written notice of termination.
Sarah worked 40 hours a week every week and was paid $12.00 an hour. She also received four per cent vacation pay. Because she worked for more than three years but less than four years, she is entitled to three weeks' pay in lieu of notice.
Sarah's regular wages for a regular work week are calculated:
$12.00 an hour × 40 hours a week = $480.00 a week
Her termination pay is calculated:
$480.00 × 3 weeks = $1,440.00
4% of $1,440.00 = $57.60
$1,440.00 + $57.60 = $1,497.60
No regular work week
Gerry has worked at a nursing home for four years. He works every week, but his hours vary from week to week. His rate of pay is $12.00 an hour, and he is paid six per cent vacation pay.
Gerry's employer eliminated his position and did not give Gerry any written notice of termination. Gerry was ill and off work for two of the 12 weeks immediately preceding the day his employment was terminated. Gerry earned $1,800.00 in the 12 weeks before the day on which his employment ended.
Gerry is entitled to four weeks of termination pay.
Gerry's average earnings per week are calculated:
$1,800.00 for 12 weeks ÷ 10 weeks (Gerry was off sick for two weeks therefore these weeks are not included in the calculation) = $180.00 a week
His termination pay is calculated:
$180.00 × 4 weeks = $720.00
6% of $720.00 = $43.20
$720.00 + $43.20 = $763.20
When to Pay Termination Pay
Termination pay must be paid to an employee either  seven days after the employee is terminated or on the employee's next regular pay date, whichever is later .
Mass Termination
Special rules for notice of termination may apply when the employment of 50 or more employees is terminated at an employer's establishment within a four-week period. This is often referred to as mass termination. (Note: an "establishment" can, in some circumstances, include more than one location.)
When a mass termination occurs, the employer must submit the Form 1 (Notice of Termination of Employment) to the Director of Employment Standards before  giving notice to the affected employees. Notice of mass termination is not considered to be effective until the employer submits this form.
In addition to providing employees with individual notices of termination, the employer must post a copy of the Form 1 provided to the Director of Employment Standards in the workplace where it will come to the attention of the employees it affects on the first day of the notice period.
The amount of notice employees must receive in a mass termination is not based on the employees' length of employment, but on the number of employees who have been terminated. An employer must give:
8 weeks' notice if the employment of  50 to 199 employees is to be terminated
12 weeks' notice if the employment of  200 to 499 employees is to be terminated
16 weeks' notice if the employment of  500 or more employees is to be terminated
Exception to the Mass-Termination Rules
The mass-termination rules do not apply if:
The number of employees whose employment is being terminated represents not more than 10 per cent of the employees who have been employed for at least three months at the establishment,
and
None of the terminations are caused by the permanent discontinuance of all or part of the employer's business at the establishment.
Mass Termination: Resignation by an Employee
An employee who has received termination notice under the mass termination rules may wish to resign before the termination date provided in the employer's notice.
In this case, the employee must give the employer at least one week's written notice of resignation if the employee has been employed for less than two years. If the employment period has been two years or more, the employee must give at least two weeks' written notice of resignation.
An employee does not have to give notice of resignation if the employer constructively dismisses the employee or breaches a term of the contract.
Temporary Work After Termination
An employee can work for the employer on a temporary basis in the 13-week period after  his or her employment has been terminated without affecting the original date of the termination. When the temporary work has ended, the employer is not required to provide any further notice of termination to the employee.
If an employee works beyond  the 13-week period after the termination date, the employee becomes entitled to written notice of termination as if it had never been given. The employee's period of employment will then also include the period of temporary work.
Recall Rights
A "recall right" is the right of an employee on a layoff to be called back to work by his or her employer under a term or condition of employment. This right is commonly found in a collective agreement.
An employee who has recall rights and who is entitled to termination pay because of a layoff of 35 weeks or more may choose to:
keep his or her recall rights and not be paid termination pay at that time;
or
give up his or her recall rights and receive termination pay.
If an employee is entitled to both termination pay and severance pay, he or she must make the same choice for both.
If an employee who is not  represented by a trade union elects to keep his or her recall rights or fails to make a choice, the employer must send the amount of the termination pay (and severance pay, if any) to the Director of Employment Standards, who holds the money in trust.
If an employee who is  represented by a trade union elects to keep his or her recall rights or fails to make a choice, the employer and the trade union must try to come to an arrangement to hold the termination pay (and severance pay, if any) in trust for the employee.  If they cannot come to an arrangement, the employer must send the termination pay (and severance pay, if any) to the Director of Employment Standards, who holds the money in trust.
If an employee chooses to give up his or her recall rights or if the recall rights expire, the money that is held in trust must be sent to the employee.
If the employee accepts a recall back to work, the money that is held in trust will be returned to the employer.
Exemptions to Notice of Termination or Termination Pay
Many of these exemptions are complex. Please contact the Employment Standards Information Centre, 1-800-531-5551, if you need more information.
The notice of termination and termination pay requirements of the ESA  do not apply to an employee who:
is guilty of wilful misconduct, disobedience or wilful neglect of duty that is not  trivial and has not been condoned by the employer.  Note: "wilful" includes when an employee intended the resulting consequence or acted recklessly knowing the effects their conduct would have.  Poor work conduct that is accidental or involuntary is generally not considered wilful.
is employed to provide professional services,  personal support services or homemaking services as defined in the Long-Term  Care Act, 1994 for an employer who has a contract to provide those services  with a community care access corporation within the meaning of the Community  Care Access Corporations Act, 2001 , if the employee’s arrangement with the  employer allows the employee to elect to work or not to work when requested to  do so by the employer;
was hired for a specific length of time or to do a specific task.  However, such an employee will be entitled to notice of termination or termination pay if:
the employment ends before the term expires or the task is completed; or
the term expires or the task is not completed more than 12 months after the employment started; or
the employment continues for three months or more after the term expires or the task is completed.
is employed in construction, this includes employees who are doing off-site work in whole or in part who are commonly associated in work or collective bargaining with employees who work at the construction site;
builds, alters or repairs certain types of ships
has his or her employment terminated when he or she reaches the age of retirement in accordance with the employer's established practice, but only if the termination would not contravene the Human Rights Code .
has refused an offer of reasonable alternative employment with the employer;
has refused to exercise his or her right to another position that is available under a seniority system. This usually means the employee gives up the right to displace or "bump" another employee in order to keep working;
is on a temporary lay-off
does not return to work within a reasonable time after being recalled to work from a temporary layoff;
is terminated during or as a result of a strike or lockout at the workplace;
has lost his or her employment because the contract of employment is impossible to perform or has been frustrated by an unexpected or unforeseen event or circumstance, such as a fire or flood, that makes it impossible for the employer to keep the employee working. (This does not include bankruptcy or insolvency or when the contract is frustrated or impossible to perform as the result of an injury or illness suffered by an employee.)
Wrongful Dismissal
The rules under the ESA  about termination and severance of employment are minimum requirements. An employee may choose instead to sue an employer in a court of law for "wrongful dismissal."  An employee cannot sue an employer for wrongful dismissal and  file a claim for termination pay or severance pay with the ministry for the same termination or severance of employment. The employee must choose one or the other and may wish to obtain legal advice concerning their rights.
Greater Right to Termination Notice, Pay in Lieu, and Severance Pay
The ESA  provides minimum standards only.  Some employees may have rights under the common law or other legislation that give them greater rights relating to notice of termination (or termination pay) and severance pay than the ESA .  Employers and employees may wish to obtain legal advice concerning their rights.
