Go 19648
Actions and Proposals to Balance FY 2011 Budgets: Employee Actions
In July 2010, The National Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL) released its State Budget Update: July 2010 . The report shows that states faced aggregate budget gaps of at least $83.9 billion during enactment of their FY 2011 budgets. To illustrate the actual implications of these budget gaps, NCSL has compiled this series of tables detailing the proposed and enacted budget cutting and revenue increasing measures states are taking to close the gaps.
Actions & Proposals to Balance the FY 2011 Budget: Employee Actions
State
Alabama
Enacted: Under the FY 2011 general fund budget, state workers will pay higher health insurance costs.
Alaska
Enacted: Budget cuts pay by 2.75% for most state employees.
Arkansas
Enacted: The FY 2011 budget does not include cost of living increases for state employees. The governor estimated that a 2.3% increase would have cost approximately $20 million. If state revenue increases during FY 2011, budget officials hope to restore the raises.
California 
Governor proposed reducing future pension programs for state workers.
Governor proposed stopping state employee furloughs and replacing them with a 5% pay cut, a 5% increase in contributions to retirement plans and a directive to all state departments to cut overall payroll costs by 5% through layoffs, attrition, or hiring people at lower salaries. In addition, another 5% pay cut could be triggered if the federal government does not come through with additional funding that the Governor has asked for.
Failed: The House and Senate passed a measure that would slice 5% from employee payrolls, saving more than $230 million.  The governor vetoed ABX82 on 3/7/10.
The Citizens Compensation Commission is considering a proposal to cut compensation for the state’s top elected officials by 10%.
CCC is also considering a cut to car allowances for Assembly and Senate members.
The Union representing California Highway Patrol officers and three other state labor groups - comprising about 25,000 state workers - agreed to roll back pension benefits for new hires and increase employees' pension contributions.
Governor announced two-year agreements with the Union of American Physicians and Dentists and the International Union of Operating Engineers. The agreements will lower salaries and roll back pension benefits for the 14,000 state employees represented by these unions, saving a projected $66 million.
Governor plans to slash state workers' pay to the federal minimum wage until a budget is in place; the missing pay would be paid back to employees after the budget is in place. An appellate court determined this measure is legal. The State Comptroller signaled he would appeal to the state Supreme Court.
Colorado
Enacted: Signed budget increased employer and employee contributions, raised the minimum retirement age for new employees from 55 to 60, capped cost of living adjustments for current and future retirees at 2% instead of 3.5%, and froze them for a year.
Connecticut
Failed: Governor proposed driving down employee health costs by renegotiating the pharmacy contract for prescription drugs and maximizing prescription drug rebates for a savings of $5.1 million.
Failed: Governor proposed implementing new health care tier for new employees, effective Jan. 1, 2011, for a savings of $1.1 million.
Florida
Enacted: The FY 2011 budget does not include pay raises for state employees.
Enacted: The FY 2011 budget requires 27,000 state employees (mostly managers) and lawmakers begin paying a portion of their health insurance premiums. The annual premium cost will be $100 for individuals and $360 for families.
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Enacted: The state’s seven constitutional officers, which include the governor, attorney general and state superintendant, will get a 4% pay cut in 2011.
Enacted: New state employees must now wait 90 days to be eligible for health insurance, up from 30 days. The change is estimated to save about $5 million.
Illinois
Enacted: The FY 2011 budget cuts $15.4 million from the Illinois State Police budget.
Enacted: In March 2010 the governor signed into law changes to the state pension system. The changes included raising the retirement age to 67, capping annual pensions at $106,800 and cutting cost of living increases to half of the U.S. Consumer Price Index. The governor estimates the changes will save $300 million in FY 2011.
Enacted: The governor and the state’s employees unions reached an agreement on a voluntary furlough program and a pay freeze. Under the furlough program, for every two furlough days agreed to by an employee, the employee can take an extra day off at Thanksgiving and over the Christmas and New Year's break. Under the pay freeze agreement, scheduled raises for union workers are delayed until July 1, 2011. In exchange, the state agreed not to layoff union workers through June 30, 2011. The plan also prevents the state from closing any additional facilities through June 30, 2011. The union concessions are expected to save the state $180 million in FY 2011. The furlough and pay freeze agreement was reached after the unions won a lawsuit in September 2009 preventing the governor from laying off 2,600 state employees.
Enacted: A small percentage of state employee have been approved for flexible work schedules, including nine day pay periods or a four day work weeks.
Enacted: The FY 2011 budget cuts legislators’ per diems from $139 to $111.
Enacted: The FY 2011 budget requires all members of the legislature and executive branch officials to take 12 furlough days.
Enacted: The FY 2011 budget eliminates 3% automatic cost of living increases for executive branch officials and legislators.
Enacted: The FY 2011 budget reduces General Assembly travel reimbursements from $0.50 to $0.39 per mile.
Failed: A proposal requiring state employees to begin paying premiums for health-care coverage. 
Failed: Increased rates for state retiree health benefits.
The governor has urged the legislature to approve a plan to borrow $3.7 billion to allow the state to make its annual pension payment. The house approved the measure, but the senate will not vote on the plan until November 4, 2010, two days after the general election.
Indiana
X
Enacted: As part of broader cuts to the two-year budget approved in 2009, the governor has eliminated raises, froze most vacant positions and cut back on travel.
Iowa
Enacted: SF 2062, the State Employee Early Retirement Incentive Program (SERIP), provided state employees 55 years of age or older the option of early retirement. The program was initially estimated to save $57 million annually, but employee participation was higher than originally anticipated leading to estimated savings of $88.6 million.
Enacted: HF 2518 requires state and local governments and their employees to pay at least $103.5 million more annually in retirement costs.
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Enacted: At the beginning of FY 2011, the governor issued an executive order instituting a partial hiring freeze across most state agencies, with new hires requiring approval from the governor’s budget chief. The governor aims to achieve savings of at least $20 million as a result of the freeze. Positions exempt from the hiring freeze include elected officials, positions at public colleges, and jobs connected to patient care and public safety.
Enacted: The governor suspended raises scheduled for the beginning of FY 2011 for 60,000 classified state employees and 30,000 unclassified employees.
Enacted: HB 1337 involves various changes to the state retirement system. Among the changes is an expansion from three years to five years of the period at the end of employment used in the calculation of benefits. The law also requires teachers be at least 60 years of age before becoming eligible for retirement benefits; under the previous system, some teachers were eligible for benefits before the age of 60.
Failed: HB 930 and HB 931 would have created a new defined contribution retirement plan for new state employees.
Failed: HB 224 would have eliminated retirement benefits for former state employees when they are in prison.
Maine
Maryland
Enacted: The Public Employees’ and Retirees’ Benefit Sustainability Commission was established to provide an external review of state funded pensions and post retirement benefits provided to state and public education employees. Its findings and recommendations will be utilized in the 2011 session.
Massachusetts
Enacted: In May 2010, the governor signed into law changes to the school employee retirement system. As an incentive for early retirement, the new law increased to 1.6% from 1.5% the multiplier used to calculate pension benefits. The percentage is multiplied by average final compensation and years of employment to determine an employee’s annual pension. Beginning July 1st, all teachers will begin contributing an additional 3% of earnings to the state retiree health care fund. Based on an initial estimate of 27,000 early retirees, the state estimated annual savings of $680 million. At the deadline in June 2010, actual retirees numbered 17,063, resulting in estimated savings of $515 million annually, according to the Michigan Office of Retirement Services. 
The House Speaker has proposed changes to the state employee retirement system, similar to recently enacted changes to the school employee retirement system. He estimates the changes could save more than $100 million in FY 2011.
Minnesota
Mississippi
Legislators proposed measure to temporarily cut legislative pay. 
The house approved higher pension contributions for state employees. The rate is proposed to go from 7.25% to 9%. 
Missouri
Enacted: State will no longer match employee contributions to 401k up to $35 a month. 
Enacted: Governor proposed eliminating paid holidays for state employees. 
House approved a budget that caps dept. executive pay at $86,500 per year and eliminated the $45,000 per year salary of the governor’s chef. 
Senate proposed a salary cap for elected officials, while the House proposed a pay cut. 
Montana
Nebraska
Governor proposed freezing the salaries of the six constitutional officers of the state.
Nevada
Governor proposed a pay reduction of 5.7%.
Failed: Legislature enacted measure that would have shifted most state employees to a four-day, 10-hours-per-day workweek. Most state offices will be closed on Fridays.  The governor vetoed this bill. The governor supports four-day workweeks, but he wants agency heads to have the power to implement them.
New Hampshire
New Mexico
New York
Enacted: The FY 2011 budget contains a contingency plan in the event the enhanced Federal Medical Assistance Percentages (FMAP) is discontinued. The plan is a prioritized list of actions that first accesses reserve funds, including the state’s Disaster Relief Fund, Rainy Day fund, extra lottery receipts and unused money from the General Fund. After accessing reserves, Medicaid provider rates would be cut, the state would hold back $139 million in contributions to the state pension plan, and a 1% across the board spending cut estimated to save $177 million would be implemented. 
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
South Carolina
X
Enacted: The legislature’s executive board imposed a travel ban on all state-paid, out-of-state travel starting at the beginning of FY 2011.
Tennessee
Texas
P
Governor proposed cutting funding to the Dept. of Public Safety by $10 million. The governor proposed the savings should come from a combination of furloughs, a hiring freeze, and cutting travel expenses.
Vermont
Enacted: Measure renegotiates contracts with state employees (new two-year contract that reduces pay by 3%).
Virginia
Washington
 Dept. of Transportation is requiring two furlough days for about 5,000 staff members, saving $1.4 million.
SB 6503: Proposed nine additional furlough dates through June 2011.
State auditor's office is saving $2.6 million with voluntary retirements, leave without pay, reduced worker hours, and eliminated positions.
Enacted: SB 6503 placed nine additional furlough days through June 2011, affecting up to 35,000 state government and college employees. The furloughs are expected to save $38 million in general-fund payment and $73 million from other funds.
West Virginia
Enacted: At the request of the governor, the Consolidated Public Retirement Board revisited the premiums it charges to employees enrolled in the state pension plan. The board raised premiums by 1.5%, to 12.5%, freeing up nearly $15 million in general revenue.
Wisconsin
P = Proposed
Source:   NCSL survey of state legislative fiscal offices: November 2009. Various media and government outlets: November 2009 – September 2010.
This table is intended to provide general information and does not necessarily address all aspects of this topic. The table reflects in summary form information gathered from media sources and NCSL surveys of legislative fiscal offices. Please contact us at budget.revenue.updates@ncsl.org  if you know of any additional information that should be reflected here or any errors that should be corrected.
©2010 National Conference of State Legislatures.  All Rights Reserved. 
