CHAPTER ONE GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER THREE LABOUR CONTRACT AND COLLECTIVE CONTRACT
CHAPTER FOUR WORKING HOURS, REST AND VACATION
CHAPTER FIVE WAGE
CHAPTER SEVEN SPECIAL PROTECTION TO WOMEN WORKERS AND  UNDERAGE WORKERS CHAPTER EIGHT JOB TRAINING
CHAPTER NINE SOCIAL INSURANCE AND WELFARE
CHAPTER TEN LABOUR DISPUTES
CHAPTER TWELVE LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY
CHAPTER THIRTEEN SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS
Article 1 The law has been formulated according to the  Constitution with a view to protecting the legitimate rights and interests of  workers, regulating labour relations, establishing and safeguarding a labour  system that is adaptable to a socialist market economy and promoting economic  development and social progress.
Article 2 The law applies to all enterprises, individual  economic organizations (hereinafter referred to as "employers") and workers  bound up by contractual labour relationship.
The law is also applicable to government organs,  institutions, social organizations and workers bound up by labour contracts.
Article 3 Workers enjoy the rights to equal opportunities  of employment and choice of jobs, the right to labour remuneration, the right to  rest and vacation, the right to labour safety and health protection, the right  to vocational training, the right to social insurance protection and welfare,  the right to settlement of labour disputes and other rights as provided by law.
Workers should fulfil job assignments, improve their  skills, follow labour safety and health regulations, observe labour discipline  and professional ethics.
Article 4 Employers shall establish and improve their  rules and regulations according to law and ensure that the workers enjoy their  rights and perform their obligations.
Article 5 The State shall adopt all possible measures to  promote employment, develop vocational education, formulate labour standards,  regulate social income, improve social insurance, coordinate labour relations  and gradually improve the living standards of the workers.
Article 6 The State encourages the workers to participate  in social voluntary labour, engage in labour emulation and put forward  rationalization proposals, encourages and protects workers in their scientific  research, technical innovation and invention and commands and rewards model  workers and advanced workers.
Article 7 Workers have the right to join in and organize  trade unions according to law.
The trade unions represent and protect the legitimate  rights and interests of the workers and carry out their activities independently  according to law.
Article 8 Workers shall, according to legal provisions  and through workers' congresses, workers' representatives or other channels,  participate in democratic management or carry out consultation on an equal  footing with their employers concerning the protection of their own legitimate  rights and interests.
Article 9 The labour administrative department of the  State Council is responsible for labour work in the whole country.
The labour administrative departments of the local  people's governments above the county level are responsible for labour work  within their administrative regions.
CHAPTER TWO PROMOTION OF EMPLOYMENT
Article 10 The State shall create employment conditions  and expand employment opportunities by way of promoting economic and social  development.
The State encourages enterprises, institutional  organizations and people's organizations to run industries or open up more  avenues for operation to increase employment opportunities within the framework  of the laws and administrative decrees.
The State supports the workers to organize themselves,  voluntarily for business operations or go in for individual businesses to  increase employment.
Article 11 The people's governments at all levels should  adopt measures to develop all kinds of labour exchanges to provide employment  services.
Article 12 With regard to employment, the workers shall  not be discriminated in aspects of nationality, race, sex and religious beliefs.
Article 13 Women enjoy the equal rights of employment as  men. In providing employment, it is not allowed to refuse employment of women on  sex grounds or raise the employment standards for women, except when the jobs or  work posts are not suitable for women as provided for by the State.
Article 14 If there are special provisions in other laws  or regulations concerning the employment of handicapped people, people of  minority nationalities and soldiers quitting active service, those provisions  shall apply.
Article 15 It is forbidden for employers to employ  persons under the age of sixteen.
Whenever an unit in culture and arts, sports and special  arts and crafts needs to employ young persons under the age of sixteen,  examination and approval procedures-shall be undertaken according to relevant  regulations of the State and the employees thereof should be ensured the right  of receiving compulsory education.
CHAPTER THREE LABOUR CONTRACT AND COLLECTIVE CONTRACT
Article 16 A labour contract is an agreement that defines  the labour relations between workers and employers as well as the rights and  obligations of the two parties.
In establishing labour relations, labour contracts shall  be concluded.
Article 17 The conclusion and revision of labour  contracts shall observe the principle of equality, voluntariness and unanimity  through consultation. It shall not violate the provisions of the laws or  administrative decrees.
A labour contract concluded according to law is legally  binding and parties to the contract are obliged to perform their obligations  provided for in the labour contract.
Article 18 The following labour contracts are invalid:
1. Contracts that have violated the provisions of the law  or administrative decrees;
2. Contracts that have been concluded by deception or  coercion.
Invalid labour contracts are not legally binding from the  moment they are concluded. Whenever a part of a labour contract has been  affirmed invalid, the remaining parts of it shall still be valid if the invalid  part does not affect the effect of them.
The invalidity of a labour contract shall be determined  by the labour dispute arbitration committee or the people's court.
Article 19 A labour contract shall be concluded in a  written form and shall contain the following provisions:
1. Term of the labour contract;
2. Specific job requirements;
4. Remuneration;
7. Responsibilities for violating the labour contract.
Apart from these provisions that must be included in a  labour contract as provided for in the preceding paragraph, the parties  concerned may add other provisions upon agreement through consultation.
Article 20 The term of a contract may be fixed or  non-fixed or fixed in terms of a certain amount of work done.
When extension of a labour contract under agreement of  both parties after a worker has worked for an uninterrupted term of ten years or  over for a same employer, a labour contract without a fixed term may be  concluded if the worker so desires.
Article 21 A labour contract may set up a term of trial  execution but the maximum length shall not exceed six months.
Article 22 Provisions may be laid down upon agreement of  both parties in a labour contract in terms of keeping commercial secrets of the  employer.
Article 23 A labour contract shall be terminated whenever  the term provided for in the contract expires or conditions for terminating the  contract agreed upon have appeared.
Article 24 A labour contract may be dissolved upon  agreement of parties concerned through consultation.
Article 25 An employer may dissolve a labour contract if  one of the following cases occurs:
1. A worker is proved to be not up to the employment  standards within the period of trial use;
2. A worker has seriously violated labour discipline or  the rules and regulations having been laid down by the employer.
3. A worker has committed serious dereliction of duty or  resorted to deception for personal gains and caused serious losses to the  interests of the employer.
4. A worker has been affixed with criminal  responsibility.
Article 26 In one of the following cases, an employer may  dissolve a labour contract but shall serve a written notice to the worker in  person 30 days in advance:
1. A worker, after a treatment of disease or non-job  injuries, is unable to do the job arranged by the employer.
2. A worker is not competent for the job assigned to him  and still falls short of the standards even after being trained or given other  jobs.
3. A labour contract can no longer be executed due to  major changes in the objective conditions and a revision cannot be reached  through consultation by both parties.
Article 27 When an employer needs to cut employment due  to the conditions of near bankruptcy and in a period of legal rectification or  due to difficulties in its production or business operation, the trade union or  all the workers should be informed of the true situation with their opinions  heard and conveyed by the employer to the labour administration department.
If an employer that has cut the employment according to  the provisions of this article recruits workers again within six months,  priority shall be given to the employees being formerly cut.
Article 28 Whenever a termination of labour contracts  according to the provisions of Article 24, Article 26, and Article 27 of this  law, the employer should given a certain economic compensation to the employees  being cut according to the relevant provisions of the State.
Article 29 An employer shall not dissolve labour  contracts according to Article 26 and Article 27 if one of the following cases  occur with the workers concerned:
1. A workers has been confirmed to have lost totally or  partially the capabilities of work due to occupational disease or job injuries;
2. A worker is in the period of treatment for diseases or  injuries;
3. A woman worker is in the pregnancy, lying-in and  breast-feeding period;
4. Other cases as provided for by law or administrative  decrees.
Article 30 If a trade union deems it improper for the  employer to dissolve a labour contract, it has the right to raise its opinions.  If an employer has violated the law, regulations or the labour contract, the  trade union has the right to demand for correction. A trade union shall support  and assist, according to law, a worker who applies for arbitration or brings the  case before the court.
Article 31 If a worker wants to dissolve his labour  contract, a notification in written form should be given to the employer  concerned 30 days in advance.
Article 32 A worker may notify the employer of his  decision to dissolve the labour contract at any time in one of the following  cases:
1. During the period of trial use;
2. The employer compels a worker to work by the use of  force, threat or by means of illegally restricting personal freedom;
3. The employer fails to pay remuneration or provide the  working conditions agreed upon in the labour contract.
Article 33 The workers of an enterprise may sign a  collective contract with the management on pay, working hours, rest and  vacation, safety and health, insurance and welfare. The draft of the collective  contract shall be submitted to the workers' congress or to all the workers for  discussion and approval.
A collective contract shall be signed by the trade union  on behalf of the workers and the management of the enterprise. In the absence of  a trade union, it shall be signed by representatives of the workers and the  management.
Article 34 A collective contract, after it is signed,  shall be submitted to the labour administrative department. If the labour  administrative department does not raise any objection within 15 days after the  document of the collective contract is received, the collective contract is  deemed to come into effect.
Article 35 The collective contract signed according to  law shall be legally binding to both the enterprise management and all the  workers. The working conditions and pay standards agreed upon in the labour  contracts signed by individual workers and the enterprise management shall not  be lower than those provided for in the collective contract.
CHAPTER FOUR WORKING HOURS, REST AND VACATION
Article 36 The State institutes a working hour system by  which every worker shall not work more than eight hours a day and the average  working hours per week shall not exceed 44 hours.
Article 37 For workers doing piece jobs, the employer  should rationally determine the quotas and piece rate in accordance with the  work houring system provided for in Article 36 of this law.
Article 38 An employer shall ensure every worker to have  at least one days' rest for a week.
Article 39 If an enterprise is unable to implement the  provisions of Article 36 and Article 38 due to its particularitise of  production, it may introduce other systems of work upon approval of the labour  administrative department.
Article 40 An employer shall arrange holidays for its  workers in the following festivals:
1. New Year's Day;
5. Other holidays and festivals as provided for by law or  administrative decrees.
Article 41 If needs arise in production and operations,  an employer may extend the working hours after consulting the trade union and  the workers, but the overtime working shall not exceed one hour a day; in  special circumstances that requires extension of working hours, the overtime  working shall not exceed three hours a day and 36 hours per month under the  conditions of ensuring the health of the workers.
Article 42 The extension of working hours shall not be  restricted in one of the following cases:
1. In emergencies when the life and health of the workers  and property are threatened due to natural disasters, accidents or other causes;
2. Rush repairs are necessary when production equipment,  transportation lines or public facilities are in trouble and affecting  production and public interests;
3. Other cases as provided for by law or administrative  decrees.
Article 43 Employers shall not extend the working hours  by violating the provisions of this law.
Article 44 An employer shall pay the workers wages at a  rate higher than that for normal working hours according to the following  standards in one of the following cases:
1. To pay no less than 150 percent of the usual wage for  working overtime;
2. To pay 200 percent of the usual wage for work during  rest days if the rest could not be delayed to an other time.
3. To pay 300 percent of the usual wage for working in  statutory holidays.
Article 45 The State institutes the system of annual paid  vacation.
A worker who has worked for more than one year shall  enjoy the annual paid vacation. The specific regulations in this regard shall be  worked out by the State Council.
Article 46 Wages shall be paid according to the principle  of "to each according to one's work done" and equal pay for equal work.
The wage scale shall be raised gradually on the basis of  economic development. The State shall exercise macro control over the overall  payroll.
Article 47 An employer shall determine independently its  own distribution of wages and wage scale according to the characteristics of  production or operation and its economic results.
Article 48 The State institutes the minimum wage  protection system. The specific standards of the minimum wage shall be  determined by various provinces, autonomous regions and centrally administered  municipalities and submitted to the State Council for record.
The wage paid to a worker by an employer shall not be  lower than the minimum wage standard of the locality.
Article 49 In determining and adjusting the minimum wage  standards, the following factors shall be taken into consideration:
1. The minimum living expenses of the worker himself and  the average minimum living expenses of the family members he/she supports;
2. Average wage level in the country;
3. Labour productivity;
5. Differences in the levels of economic development  among different regions.
Article 50 Wages shall be paid to the workers themselves  in cash and on a monthly basis. In no circumstance is it allowed to deduct or  delay the payment.
Article 51 An employer shall pay wages according to law  to workers during their statutory holidays and during marriage or funeral leave  or during the time of participating in social activities according to law.
CHAPTER SIX SAFETY AND HEALTH CARE
Article 52 An employer shall establish and perfect the  labour safety and health care system, strictly implement the labour safety and  health care regulations and standards of the State, carry out labour safety and  health care education among the workers and prevent accidents during work and  reduce occupational hazards.
Article 53 Labour safety and health care facilities shall  conform to the standards set by the State.
Labour safety and health care facilities for new,  rebuilding or expansion projects shall be designed, constructed and put into use  simultaneously with the main projects.
Article 54 An employer shall provide the worker with  labour safety and health conditions and necessary labour protection articles  conforming to the stipulations by the State and give regular body check-ups to  workers engaging in hazardous jobs.
Article 55 Workers engaging in special operations shall  receive special training to acquire the required qualifications.
Article 56 A worker shall strictly observe safety  operation procedures.
A worker has the right to refuse to engage in dangerous  operations forced upon them by the management in violation of the relevant  regulations, and has the right to criticize, inform or bring charges against  acts that are harmful to the life and safety and personal health.
Article 57 The State institutes the system of statistics,  reporting and handling deaths and injuries and occupational diseases. The labour  administrative departments of the people's governments above the county level,  relevant departments and employers shall collect statistics, report and handle  deaths and job injuries and occupational diseases according to law.
CHAPTER SEVEN SPECIAL PROTECTION TO WOMEN WORKERS AND  UNDERAGE WORKERS
Article 58 The State shall exercise special labour  protection to women workers and underage workers.
Underage workers are referred to workers between the ages  of 16 and 18.
Article 59 It is forbidden to assign women with jobs in  mines and coal shafts, labour of Class Four intensity and other jobs forbidden  by the State.
Article 60 It is not allowed to assign women with jobs in  high altitude, law temperature and cold water during the menstrual period or in  manual labour of Class Three intensity.
Article 61 It is not allowed to assign women workers with  manual labour of Class Three intensity provided for by the State during their  pregnancy or other jobs that are forbidden during pregnancy. For women workers  pregnant for more than seven months it is not allowed to make them work overtime  or in night shifts.
Article 62 Women workers giving birth shall enjoy a  maternity leave for no less than 90 days.
Article 63 It is not allowed to make women workers engage  in manual labour of Class Three intensity as provided for by the State during  the period of their under one year infant breast-feeding or other jobs forbidden  during breast-feeding period; in such cases overtime or night shift work are  also not allowed for women workers.
Article 64 It is not allowed to assign underage workers  to work in mines, coal shafts or in toxic and harmful jobs or manual labour of  Class Four intensity as provided for by the State and other jobs forbidden for  underage persons.
Article 65 An employer shall give regular health  check-ups to underage workers.
Article 66 The State shall develop vocational training  through all possible channels and all measures to develop the job skills of the  workers, improve their educational quality and enhance their opportunity to be  employed and working abilities.
Article 67 The people's governments at all levels should  incorporate job training into their social and economic development programs and  encourage and support enterprises, institutions and people's organizations where  there are the conditions and individuals to carry out job training in all kinds  and forms.
Article 68 An employer shall establish a system of job  training and draw and use fees for job training according to State regulations  and carry out job training of workers in the light of the actual conditions and  in a planned way.
For technical workers, training shall be given before  they take up their posts.
Article 69 The State shall classify the occupations and  formulate the standards for occupational skills for the jobs provided by the  State and introduce the vocational certification system. The examination and  assessment organizations approved by the State shall be responsible for the  examination and assessment of the job skills of workers.
CHAPTER NINE SOCIAL INSURANCE AND WELFARE
Article 70 The State shall develop social insurance  undertakings, establish the social insurance system, social insurance fund so  that the workers can get assistance and compensation when they reach old age or  when falling ill, suffering job injuries, unemployment or giving birth.
Article 71 The level of social insurance shall be  compatible with the level of economic and social development and the capacity of  the society to afford.
Article 72 The social insurance funds shall determine its  sources according to the type of insurance and gradually be put under the  unified arrangements by the society. Employers and workers shall participate in  social insurance schemes according to law and pay social insurance fees.
Article 73 Workers shall enjoy social insurance treatment  according to law in one of the following cases:
1. Retirement;
3. Disabled by job injuries or occupational diseases;
4. Unemployment;
After the death of a worker, the dependents shall enjoy  dependency allowances.
The conditions and standards of social insurance  treatment shall be provided for by law or regulations.
The social insurance allowances for workers shall be paid  in time and in full.
Article 74 Social insurance fund organizations shall be  responsible for the receipts, expenditure, management and operation of the  social insurance fund and undertake to ensure the maintenance and increment of  the value of the social insurance fund.
Organizations supervising the social insurance fund shall  exercise supervision over the receipts, expenditure, management and operation of  the social insurance fund according to the relevant provisions of the law.
The establishment and functions of social insurance fund  organizations and social insurance fund supervision organizations shall be  provided for by law.
No organization or individual is allowed to use social  insurance fund for purposes other than provided.
Article 75 The State encourages employers to establish  supplementary insurance for their workers in the light of actual conditions.
The State advocates for individual workers to engage in  savings insurance.
Article 76 The State develops social welfare  undertakings, build public welfare facilities to provide the conditions for the  workers to rest, convalesce and recuperate.
Employers shall create the conditions to improve the  welfare and raise the welfare benefits of the workers.
Article 77 When labour disputes arise between the  employers and workers, the parties concerned may, according to law, apply for  mediation or arbitration or bring the case before the people's court or may  settle them through consultation.
Article 78 In settling labour disputes, the principle of  legitimacy, fairness and timeliness should be followed in order to safeguard the  legitimate rights and interests of the parties to the labour disputes.
Article 79 When a labour dispute arises, the parties  concerned may apply with the labour dispute mediation committee of their own  unit for mediation. Should the mediation fail and one of the parties concerned  demands arbitration, it may apply with the labour disputes arbitration committee  for arbitration. One of the parties concerned may also file an application  directly with the labour disputes arbitration committee for arbitration. If the  arbitration ruling is not accepted, the case may be brought before the people's  court.
Article 80 A labour disputes mediation committee may be  set up in an employer's unit. The labour disputes mediation committee shall be  made up of representatives of workers, the employer and the trade union. The  chairmanship of the labour disputes mediation committee shall be taken up by the  representative of the trade union.
If an agreement has been reached after mediation, the  parties to the disputes are obliged to carry out.
Article 81 The labour disputes arbitration committee  shall be made up of representatives of labour administrative department, trade  union at the same level and the employer. The chairmanship of the labour  disputes arbitration committee shall be taken up by the representative of the  labour administrative department.
Article 82 One of the parties to a dispute demanding  arbitration should file a written application with the labour disputes  arbitration committee within 60 days starting from the date when the dispute  arises. The arbitration ruling should usually be awarded within 60 days starting  from the date when the application for arbitration is received. If no exception  is taken with the arbitration ruling, the parties concerned shall comply.
Article 83 If a party to a labour dispute refuses to  accept the ruling, the party may bring the case before the people's court within  15 days starting from the date when the arbitration award is received. If a  party refuses to bring the case before the people's court and refuses to  implement the arbitration ruling within the time limited prescribed by law, the  other party may apply with the people's court for compulsory implementation.
Article 84 If a dispute arises from the conclusion of a  collective contract and the parties concerned fail to settle the disputes  through consultation, the labour administrative department of the local people's  government may organize all quarters for settlement.
If a dispute arising from the performance of a collective  contract and yet the parties concerned fail to settle it through consultation,  they may apply for arbitration with the labour disputes arbitration committee.  If the arbitration ruling is not accepted, the case may be brought before the  people's court within 15 days starting from the date when the arbitration award  is received.
CHAPTER ELEVEN SUPERVISION AND EXAMINATION
Article 85 The labour administrative departments of the  people's governments above the county level shall exercise supervision and  examination over the employers with regard to the implementation of labour  discipline and the laws and regulations. They have the right to stop acts that  violate the labour discipline and the laws and regulations and order the parties  concerned to correct.
Article 86 Personnel of labour administrative departments  of the people's governments above the county level have the right, while on  duty, to enter the employer's units to inquire about the implementation of  labour discipline and the laws and regulations and get access to the necessary  materials and the working sites for examination.
Personnel of labour administrative departments of the  people's governments above the county level shall present their identification  cards while performing their duties and handle matters impartially and observe  relevant regulations.
Article 87 The relevant departments of the people's  governments above the county level shall exercise supervision over the  implementation of the labour discipline and the laws and regulations within the  scope of their functions.
Article 88 Trade unions at all level shall safeguard the  legitimate rights and interests of the workers and exercise supervision over the  employers with regard to the implementation of labour discipline and the laws  and regulations.
Any organization or individual shall have the right to  inform and bring charges against any act that violates labour discipline and the  laws and regulations.
CHAPTER TWELVE LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY
Article 89 For employers who have violated the provisions  of laws and regulations in formulating their own rules and regulations, the  labour administrative departments shall issue a warning and order them to  correct. If the rules and regulations formulated have caused harm to the  workers, the employers shall have the responsibility for compensation.
Article 90 If an employer has extended the hours of work  in violation of the provisions of this law, the labour administrative department  in charge shall issue a warning and command a correction and impose a fine  concurrently.
Article 91 If an employer has committed one of the  following acts that have infringed upon the legitimate rights and interests of  the workers, the labour administrative department in charge shall command  payment of wages, economic compensation and payment of compensation to the  worker:
1. Reduction or delaying the payment of workers' wages;
2. Refusal to pay remuneration for extending the working  hours;
3. Payment of labour wages at a rate lower than the  minimum wage standards of the locality; and
4. Failure to pay economic compensation to workers  according to the provisions of this law after the labour contract is dissolved.
Article 92 If the labour safety facilities and health  conditions of an employer fail to meet the State set standards or the employer  fails to provide the workers with necessary labour protection articles and  facilities, the labour administrative department in charge or relevant  departments shall command a correction or a fine. If the case is very serious,  it should be submitted to the people's government above the county level for  decision to order a stoppage of production for rectification. If an employer  fails to adopt measures to prevent hidden accidents, thus causing a major  accident that incurs loss of life and property to the workers, criminal  responsibility shall be affixed on the people responsible in reference to the  provisions of Article 187 of the criminal law.
Article 93 Criminal responsibility shall be affixed on  the persons who have forced workers to engage in risky operations and thus  causing deaths and injuries and serious consequences in violation of the  relevant regulations.
Article 94 If an employer illegally recruits persons  under the age of 16, the labour administrative department in charge shall  command a correction and a fine. If the case is very serious, the license of the  employer shall be revoked.
Article 95 If an employer has violated the provisions of  this law on the protection of women workers and underage workers and infringed  upon their legitimate rights and interests, the labour administrative department  in charge shall command a correction and a fine. The employer concerned shall  undertake the responsibility for compensation for the damage done to women  workers or underage workers.
Article 96 If an employer has committed one of the  following acts, the public security organ shall detain the persons responsible  for less than 15 days or levy a fine or give a warning and, if the case is  serious enough to constitute a crime, a criminal responsibility is affixed:
1. Compelling workers to work by the use of force, threat  or by resorting to the means of restricting personal freedom.
2. Insulting, punishing physically, beating, illegally  searching or taking workers into custody.
Article 97 If an invalid contract concluded due to  reasons on the part of the employer has caused harm to workers, the employer  shall undertake the responsibility for compensation.
Article 98 If an employer has dissolved labour contracts  in violation of the conditions prescribed by this law or wilfully put off the  conclusion of labour contracts, the labour administrative department in charge  shall command a correction and if the case has caused damages to workers, the  employer shall undertake to compensate.
Article 99 If an employer recruits workers whose original  contract with another employer has not been terminated, thus causing economic  losses to the original employer, the employer shall be responsible for the  compensation according to law.
Article 100 If an employer refuses without reason to pay  social insurance fees, the labour administrative department in charge shall  command a payment within a certain limit of time. If the employer fails to pay  within the prescribed time limit, a fine for delaying payment shall affixed.
Article 101 If an employer unjustifiably obstructs labour  administrative department in charge, relevant departments and their personnel  from exercising their rights of supervision and examination or take revenge  against informants, the labour administrative department in charge or relevant  departments shall impose a fine. If the case is serious enough to constitute a  crime, criminal responsibility shall be affixed on the persons responsible.
Article 102 If a worker dissolves his labour contract in  violation of the conditions prescribed by this law or violates the provisions on  keeping secrets agreed upon in the labour contract, thus causing economic losses  to the employer, the worker shall be responsible for the compensation.
Article 103 If personnel of a labour administrative  department or relevant department is found to have abused their power or  committed dereliction of duty or resorted to deception for personal gains,  criminal responsibility shall be affixed if the case is serious enough to  constitute a crime and if not, administrative punishments shall be meted out.
Article 104 If a government functionary or a staff member  of the social insurance fund organization is found to have used the social  insurance funds for other uses, criminal responsibility shall be affixed if the  case is serious enough to constitute a crime.
Article 105 If there are provisions by other laws or  administrative decrees on the punishment of infringements upon the legitimate  rights and interests as provided in this law, the provisions of the other laws  or administrative decrees shall apply.
CHAPTER THIRTEEN SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS
Article 106 The people's government of various provinces,  autonomous regions and centrally administered municipalities shall work out the  specific steps for implementing the labour contract system according to the  provisions of this law and in the light of the actual circumstances of their  respective areas and submit them to the State Council for record.
Article 107 The law shall come into force as of January  1, 1995.
