Updated in 2007 by Mrs. Judith Davila Monzon.
Sources of regulation
The main sources of law for termination of employment in Spain are     the Workers’ Charter, [1] Royal Decree 2546/1994 of 29 December on     recruitment, and Royal Legislative Decree 2/1995, which adopts the text which     is recast in the Labour Procedure Act (LPA). In addition, art. 35 of     the Spanish Constitution states that “all Spaniards have the duty to work     and the right to work, to the free selection of their profession or office     career, to advancement through work and to sufficient remuneration to satisfy     their needs and those of their family, while in no case can there be discrimination     for reasons of sex”. Some collective agreements also deal with this subject.
In 1985, Spain ratified     the ILO Termination of Employment Convention, 1982 (No. 158).
Scope of legislation
Labour legislation is to be applied to work done by Spanish     workers hired in Spain and in Spanish     undertakings in a foreign country.
The Workers’ Charter is applied to workers who voluntarily     provide remunerated services for another person and within the scope of organization     and management of the other physical or legal person called the employer     or entrepreneur. The following categories of workers and work are excluded     from the scope of the law:
staff       in the service of the State, local government and autonomous public entities       governed by other legislation;
mandatory       civil or community service;
activity       limited to the mere discharge of the duty of an adviser or member of the       governing bodies of corporations where this activity entails the execution       of tasks inherent in such duties;
work       carried out in the name of friendship, benevolence or good neighbourliness;
family       work, except if it is demonstrated that the persons doing the work have       the status of wage earners; and
the       persons who are involved in trading operations on behalf of one or more       employers, if they are personally responsible for the successful completion       of the transaction       and assume the risk of profit and loss.
Contracts of employment
A contract of employment is one in which a person provides     service on behalf of and within the context of the organization and direction     of another in exchange for pay. The employment contract may be concluded     in writing or orally ( sec. 8 , Workers’ Charter).
Contracts for a specified period over four weeks must be     made in writing ( sec. 8(2) , Workers’ Charter).
The employment contract may     be concluded for an indeterminate or specific period ( sec. 15(1), [2] Workers’     Charter).  Fixed-term contracts can be concluded only in the following     cases:
When       worker is hired to conclude a specific project or service, which is considered       to be autonomous yet within the normal business activities of the employer       and whose execution, although limited in the time, is in principle of unknown       duration. 
When       business demands are high and resources are stretched or there is backlog,       even though the work maybe within the normal line of business of the employer.  In       such cases, contracts can be concluded for a maximum of 6 months within a       twelve-month period.  In some cases, the maximum length can be up to 18       months if worker’s union agreement so stipulates;
When       the contractor substitutes a worker entitled to return to work after leave       (the name of the person being substituted and the reasons for temporary       replacement must always be included in the contract) [3] .
Sec. 14 of the Workers’ Charter provides for the     possibility of written agreement on a probation period, the duration of which     may not exceed six months for skilled technicians, or two months for other     workers. In enterprises employing fewer than 25 workers the probation period     may not exceed three months for workers who are not skilled technicians.
Termination of employment
Pursuant to sec. 49 of the Workers’ Charter, the     employment contract may terminate, not at the employer’s initiative, for     the following reasons:
by       mutual agreement of the parties;
force         majeure which puts a definitive end to the provision of the service;
the       expiration of the agreed term of the contract or the completion of the       task or service for which the contract was concluded;
resignation       by the worker, upon the submission of notice provided for in the applicable       collective agreements or by local practice;
because       of the death or serious or permanent total disability of the worker;
retirement       of the worker;
death,       retirement or incapacity of the employer, or the extinction of the legal       personality of the contracting party;
by       the worker, because of contractual non-performance by the employer; or
by         decision of a female worker that feels obliged to leave her job as a       consequence of being a victim of gender violence. [4]
Sec.50  of       Workers’ Charter deals with termination of a contract by will of the worker.  The       following are the instances prescribed:
Substantial         modifications of working conditions, which affect the worker’s vocational         training or dignity; 
Lack         of payment or continued delays in the guarantee of the negotiated salary;         and 
Any         other serious breach of the employer’s obligations, apart from force         majeure .
If the grounds are approved by the       Social Affairs Court Judge, the worker is entitled to compensation as if       it were an unjustified dismissal.
In accordance with sec. 14(2) of the Workers’ Charter,     during the probation period either party may end the employment relationship.
Dismissal
The employment contract may be terminated because of the     following valid reasons ( sec. 52 , Workers’ Charter):
the       inaptitude of the worker which is known or later demonstrated, after his       or her actual placement in the enterprise. Existing inaptitude observed       before the completion of a probation period may not be alleged after such       completion;
the       worker’s failure to adapt to the technical modification of his or her job,       if such changes are reasonable and have occurred after a minimum of two       months from the introduction of the modification;
the       existence of an objectively substantiated need to fill posts for any of       the reasons specified in sec. 51 (discussed below);
absence       from work, even justified but intermittent, which amounts to 20 per cent       of the working days in two consecutive months, or 25 per cent in four discontinuous       months within a period of 12 months, if the rate of absenteeism of the       total workforce exceeds 5 per cent during the same periods. However, the       following       will not be considered as absenteeism: legal strikes, employees’ representative       activities, labour accidents, maternity leave, vacations, temporary absence       from work of more than 20 consecutives days due to sickness or non-employment-related       accidents, and/or physical or psychological situation due to gender violence; [5] and
when       in indefinite-term contracts arranged directly by public authorities or       not-for-profit entities to implement certain public plans and programs,       the projects are       unable to continue due to insufficient budgetary appropriations. [6]
The employment contract may be terminated by the employer     through dismissal based on serious and culpable non-performance on the part     of the worker (disciplinary dismissal). The following are considered non-performance     of contractual obligations (sec. 54, Workers’ Charter):
repeated       and unjustified absence or lateness in the workplace;
indiscipline       or disobedience at work;
verbal       or physical offences against the employer or persons employed in the enterprise       or the family living with them;
violation       of contractual goodwill, and abuse of confidence in the discharge of duties;
continued       and voluntary reduction of normal or agreed output;
habitual       drunkenness or drug addiction if it adversely affects the worker’s work;       and
harassment       based on race or ethnic origin, religious beliefs or conviction, disability,       age or sexual orientation against the employer or other persons working       at the company. [7]
Collective dismissal is classified as the termination of     employment contracts based on economic, technical, organizational or productive     reasons within a period of 90 days, which affects     at least ( sec. 51 , Workers’ Charter):
ten       workers, in enterprises which employ fewer than 100 workers;
10       per cent of the number of workers in enterprises which employ between 100       and 300 workers; or
30       workers in enterprises which employ more than 300 workers.
The termination of employment contracts of the undertaking’s     entire workforce of five or more workers is also considered a collective     dismissal.
In Spain, the anti-discrimination     provisions of the Workers’ Charter prohibit termination of employment on     the basis of sex, ethnic origin, marital status, race, social status, religious     or political beliefs, membership or non-membership of a trade union, or language     ( secs. 4(2) and 17(1) , Workers’ Charter). To this is added protection     contained in the Act on Social Integration of the Disabled (No. 12/1982 of     31 March 1982), which extends this protection to disability status. Any termination     of employment based on the above-mentioned grounds is considered to be null     and void. In addition, a termination is null in the following cases: pregnant     workers during the period of suspension of the contract due to maternity,     risk during pregnancy, or breast-feeding leave; adoption or fostering; family     leave to care for children or handicapped persons; and in certain circumstances     female workers who have been victim of gender violence. [8] The     worker may be reinstated or paid his or her wages indefinitely, including     continued coverage by the social security system ( sec. 12 , LPA), without     prejudice to other possible civil liability to which the employer may be     subject.
Notice and prior procedural safeguards
Termination of the employment contract for objective reasons     requires the observance of the following criteria ( sec. 53(1) , Workers’     Charter):
written       communication to be given to the worker explaining the reason;
payment       to made to the worker, at the same time at which the written communication       is handed over, of compensation corresponding to 20 days for each year       of service (periods of time under one year are to be prorated by months),       up       to a maximum sum of 12 months’ pay; and
granting       to the worker a 30-day notice period.
In the case of termination of employment for misconduct,     the dismissal must be notified in writing to the worker, stating the facts     justifying the dismissal and indicating the date on which the employment     relationship will end ( sec. 55(1) , Workers’ Charter).
If the worker is a workers’ legal representative or a trade     union representative, there will be formal adversarial procedures during     which the worker concerned, and other members of the union to which he or     she belongs, may be heard. If the worker happens to be a member of a trade     union and the employer is aware of this fact, representatives of the corresponding     trade union must be heard in advance.
An employer who intends to carry out collective dismissals     must request permission from the competent labour authority and at the same     time must consult the legal representative of the workers. The communication     to the labour authority and to the legal representatives must be accompanied     by all the necessary documentation justifying the reasons for the dismissal     and the measures which are to be adopted, in the terms prescribed by regulation.     Once the request has been received by the labour authority, it will ascertain     whether the request fulfils the necessary requirements, and if it does not,     the employer must rectify the situation within ten days ( sec. 51(2) and     (3) , Workers’ Charter). Consultation with the legal representatives of     the workers should last not less than 30 calendar days, or a fortnight in     the case of enterprises employing fewer than 50 workers ( sec. 51(4) ,     Workers’ Charter). At the end of the process of consultation, the employer     must communicate to the labour authority the outcome of the deliberations.     If there is an agreement between the parties, the labour authority must hand     down a decision within a fortnight. However, if the labour authority determines, ex     officio or at the request of the party concerned, the commission of fraud,     damage, coercion or abuse of law in the conclusion of the agreement, it will     submit its decision to the judicial authority, with a suspension of the time     limit to make the decision ( sec. 51(5) , Workers’ Charter). In the     event that the period of consultation is concluded without agreement, the     labour authority must hand down a decision within a period of 15 calendar     days. The decision of the labour authority must be justified and compatible     with the wishes of the enterprise ( sec. 51(6) , Workers’ Charter).
Severance pay
Workers dismissed for valid reasons receive compensation     of 20 days’ wages for each year of service, up to a maximum sum of 12 months’     pay (for periods of service under a year, this is prorated by the number     of months of service) ( sec. 53(1)(b) , Workers’ Charter).
Workers who are unlawfully dismissed receive compensation     of 45 days’ wages for each year of service, up to a maximum of 42 months’     pay (for periods under a year, this is prorated by the number of months of     service). Compensation will also be awarded for the sum of the outstanding     wages from the date of dismissal up to notification of the decision that     the dismissal was unlawful or until the worker has found alternative employment     if such placement took place before the decision was handed down. If the     employer acknowledges that the dismissal was unjustified and places a deposit     (equivalent to the statutory severance and salaries) at the relevant Labour     Court, compensation will be from the date of dismissal until the date deposit,     provided that he/she informs the dismissed worker of the deposit.  However,     if the deposit is made at Court within 48 hours after the dismissal, no salaries     will accrue during the proceeding ( sec. 56(1)(a) and (b) , (2) Workers’     Charter). [9]
The employer can claim to the State payment of the outstanding     wages referred to in sec. 56 (1) (b), when the Court took longer than sixty     working days to make a decision. The sum claim will correspond to the time     exceeded beyond the sixty working days. [10]
Collective dismissal leads to severance payments equal to     compensation of 20 days’ wages for each year of service, up to a maximum     of 12 months’ pay (for periods of under a year, this is prorated by the number     of months of service) ( sec. 51(8) , Workers’ Charter). In undertakings     employing fewer than 25 workers, the Wage Guarantee Fund must pay 40 per     cent of the legal compensation due to the workers ( sec. 33(8) , Workers’     Charter). 
In the case of termination of fixed-term contracts ( sec.       49 (1)(c) ), the worker is entitled to receive severance equal to 8       days’ salary per year worked. [11]   This does not apply to workers contracted to       substitute employees entitled to return to their job or apprentice contracts.
Avenues for redress
In the event of dismissal the possible channels of recourse     which may be made before the labour court are: appeal, cassation and review.     The time limit for appeal is 20 working days for both disciplinary dismissal     and dismissal for objective reasons ( secs. 103 and 121 , LPA). 
If the employer does not fulfil the requirements established     under sec. 53(1), the decision to terminate employment will be declared null     and void, [12]
and the employer will be instructed to     pay the worker, according to the provisions applicable in the event of disciplinary     dismissal ( sec. 53(4) , Workers’ Charter). The wages due during the     period of deliberations may not be deducted from the wages corresponding     to the notice period ( sec. 123(2) , LPA).
If dismissal is declared unlawful, within a period of five     days from the notification of the decision, the employer must make a choice     between the reinstatement of the worker and payment of a sum of money. [13] Electing compensation is only an option     if the person dismissed was a workers’ legal representative or a union representative.     By not exercising this option, it will be taken that reinstatement has been     chosen. Whenever the option, expressed or presumed, is exercised in favour     of reinstatement, it will be legally binding ( sec. 56(4) , Workers’     Charter).
If dismissal is carried out in a manner which does not comply     with the provisions of sec. 55(1) of the Workers’ Charter, the employer     may renew the dismissal complying with the requirements omitted in the previous     case, within 20 consecutive days of the initial dismissal ( sec. 55(2),     (5) and (6) , Workers’ Charter).
A dismissal which fails to observe the rules of procedure     will be declared null and void. In the case of annulment, the decision will     be in favour of the immediate reinstatement of the worker with payment of     outstanding wages ( sec. 113 , LPA).
The judicial body, ex officio or at the request of     the party concerned, will declare null and void the agreement taken by the     employer to effect collective dismissal for economic, technical, organizational     or productive reasons, force majeure or extinction of the legal personality     of the employer if prior administrative authorization has not been obtained     ( sec. 124 , LPA). In such cases the ruling will be determined by sec.     113 of the LPA, namely, reinstatement of the worker with payment of outstanding     wages.
Further information
[1] Royal Legislative Decree 1/1995 of 24 March 1995.
[2] Sec.15 (1)  amended by Act 12/2001 of 9       July 2001 on Urgent Measures Reforming the Job Market in Order to Increase       and Improve the Quality of Employment
[3] This     exception was abrogated by the Royal Legislative Decree 5/2006 of 9 June. 
[4] Organic Law 1/2004 of 28 December 2004 on Measures     of Integral Protection against Gender Violence
[5] Sec.52 (d) of Workers’ Charter modified on Organic     Law 1/2004 of 28 December 2004
[6] Act 12/2001 of 9 July 2001
[7]   Inclusion of literal g on Sec. 54 (2) by Act     62/2003 of 30 December 2003.
[8] Sec. 55(5)(b), included by Organic law 1/2004     of 28 December 2004 on Measures of Integral Protection against Gender Violence.
[9] Sec.56 (1) and (2) amended by Act 45/2002 of 12     December 2002.
[10]   Act 45/2002 of 12 December 2002, Sec. 57.
[11] Act 12/2001 of 9 July 2001 on Urgent Measures     Reforming the Job Market in Order to Increase and Improve the Quality of     Employment.
[12] Failure to give notice will not annul the termination,       but the employer will be obliged to pay wages corresponding to the period       in question.
[13] See sec. 56(1)(a) and (b) of the Workers’ Charter       as discussed above.
Employment protection legislation database - EPLex
