Efft. Date: 9/16/93 - Rev. Date: 5/16/06
Application: Full-time and part-time classified employees  .
PURPOSE
Permits  agencies to reduce employees’ work hours and pay temporarily or to place  employees in a non-working status temporarily. Such reductions are limited to  no more than 690 work  hours in a 365-day period.  Certain  employee benefits are protected during the period of reduced-hours or  non-working status.
DEFINITIONS
Long  Term Disability (LTD)
A  benefit received by employees in a disability status who are covered by Policy  4.57, Virginia Sickness and Disability Program (VSDP).  The benefit commences upon the expiration of  a 180-calendar-day waiting period and provides partial income replacement.
Long  Term Disability- Working (LTD-Working)
A  benefit received by employees in a disability status who are covered by Policy  4.57, Virginia Sickness and Disability Program (VSDP). The benefit commences  upon the expiration of a 180-calendar-day waiting period, and allows employees  to continue to work for their agency from short-term disability working status  into LTD-working. An employee in LTD-working must work at least 20 hours or  more per workweek in their own position.
Short  Term Disability (STD)
A  benefit received by employees in a disability status who are covered by Policy  4.57, Virginia Sickness and Disability Program (VSDP). The benefit commences  upon the expiration of a 7-calendar-day waiting period, and provides  replacement income for defined periods of time based on an employee’s total  months of state service.
Temporary Work Force Reduction (TWFR)
A temporary schedule modification that  results in (1) fewer hours worked than the employee’s regular schedule, (2)  commensu­rately reduced pay, and (3) protection for the employee’s status and  benefits.
Limitations:  (1)  All reductions must be made within a  period not to exceed 365 days.
(2)  An employee may not be subject to TWFR in a successive 365-day period  calculated from the final day of his or her TWFR-altered schedule.
Variations: (1) Reductions may be  continuous or intermittent. (2) Work hours may be reduced or eliminated  completely for one or more pay periods. 
Part-time classified employees are subject to  TWFR, with proportionate limits. For example, an employee who works 24 hours  per week (60% of full time) may have his or her work hours reduced by up to 414  hours (60% of 690) within a 365-day period.
Temporary Work Force Reduction – Combination
A  temporary change in an employee’s work schedule that places the employee in a  non-working, non-pay status for one or more complete pay periods and reduces  scheduled work hours and pay during one or more other pay periods. For example,  the employee’s schedule may be changed to reflect no work hours from November  25 through January 9, and 32 hours per week from January 10 through March 10.  The maximum total reduction of work time for a full-time employee is 690 hours  in a 365-day period.
Temporary Work Force Reduction – Non-working  status
A  temporary change in an employee’s work schedule that places the employee in a  non-working, non-pay status for one or more complete pay periods. The  employee’s work schedule is changed so that the (full-time) employee does not  work for up to 690 work hours within a 365-day period. Such non-working status  may be scheduled continuously or intermittently within the 365-day period.
Temporary Work Force Reduction – Reduced Hours
A temporary change in an employee’s work  schedule so that the employee works fewer than his or her regularly scheduled  work hours per pay period. The employee’s salary is reduced commensu­rately for  affected pay periods during the specified duration of the schedule reduction. A  reduction in hours may be scheduled continuously or intermittently. The maximum  reduc­tion is 690 hours in a 365-day period (for full-time employees).
The employee’s benefits will be protected  although the employee may work less than 20 hours per week during a temporary  work force reduction (TWFR).
VRS  Retirement Contribution and Service Credit
Earned  VRS service credit, including any prior service credit that is used in the  calculation of a retirement benefit. See below for effects of TWFR on  retirement contribution and credit.
IMPLEMENTING  TWFR
Identification of Employees for TWFR
Agency  management shall identify employees to be affected by a TWFR based on agency  business needs. Employees may request to be considered for TWFR; however, the  agency has final authority for identifying employees for TWFR. The decision  must be non-discriminatory and must comply with provisions of Policy 2.05,  Equal Employment Opportunity.  Agencies  should consider reducing or eliminating the hours of wage employees as an  alternative or addition to TWFR of classified employees.
Duration of TWFR
The  period during which an employee’s work hours are reduced or eliminated may be  continuous or intermittent but may not extend for more than 365 days from the  date of the first schedule change due to TWFR.
Additionally,  TWFR cannot be imposed on an employee in successive years.  That is, an employee who has been placed on  TWFR is not subject to another TWFR for 365 days from the date of his or her  last scheduled TWFR change.  For example,  the schedule of an employee on TWFR is reduced for the period January 10  through May 29.  This employee is not  subject to another TWFR until May 30 of the next  calendar year.
Maximum Amount of Reduction
A  full-time, 40-hours per week employee’s work schedule may be reduced by no more  than 690 hours per 365-day period.  The  limit for part-time classified employees must be pro-rated according to their  percentage of a 40-hour schedule.
FLSA Impact of TWFR
Agencies  may reduce the work hours and salary of an FLSA-exempt  employee for some or all hours in a workweek due to budgetary  requirements.  The employee’s exemption  is lost only for the workweek(s) when the hours and salary are reduced.  If an agency uses TWFR for business reasons  unrelated to budgetary requirements, the hours and salaries of FLSA-exempt employees  may only be reduced in full workweek increments.
Prior to Implementing TWFR
designate  business functions to be suspended or reassigned,
determine  whether the entire agency or only certain designated work unit(s) are to be  affected,
determine  if TWFR will be imposed as non-working status,   reduced schedule, or a combination, and
determine if voluntary requests for TWFR will be considered.
NOTE:  While relying on business necessity in planning a TWFR, agencies should also be  aware of the impact of such decisions on employees. Therefore, if possible,  agencies should consider the impact on employee morale when establishing TWFR  schedules.
Notification  Process
Agencies  must provide a minimum of two weeks notice to employees before placing them in  TWFR. The following information must be included in the notice to employees  (See attachment A):
Extent  of the TWFR (reduced hours, non-working status, or a combination) and total  reduced hours anticipated;
Schedule  for the entire period of the TWFR as far as possible, and
Status  of employee’s benefits during the TWFR including leave accrual rate for  employees working reduced hours.
Management reserves the right to alter  the TWFR schedule as business needs require. Agencies must notify employees if further reductions are to be made. Such changes must fall within the original  365-day period and may not exceed the policy maximum (690 hours for full-time  employees).
NOTE: A modified schedule does not create or  imply an employment contract.
Conclusion  of TWFR
At  the end of the TWFR, the employee must be returned to his or her original  position and schedule.  If the agency  determines that staff reductions must be made on a permanent basis, the  provisions and procedures of Policy 1.30, Layoff , must be applied.
TWFR for Employees ON  LEAVE WITH PAY AND VSDP
VSDP  Short Term Disability (STD) Benefits
An employee on STD under the Virginia Sickness and  Disability Program (see Policy 4.57, Virginia Sickness and Disability Program )  may receive notice that his or her position will be subject to a TWFR.  STD benefits will not be reduced because of  the TWFR status except that the employee may not use annual, compensa­tory or  overtime leave to restore his or her salary to 100% income replacement.  However, disability credits may be used during TWFR to restore the employee’s  salary to 100% income replacement.
If the employee is released to work full-time/full-duty  within the time period of the announced TWFR, he or she will be placed on the  TWFR schedule (reduced hours, non-working, or combi­nation status at that time.
Time when the employee is on TWFR status, reduced hours,  non-working, or combination status, counts toward the 180-day period for LTD  eligibility.
If an employee moves from STD into LTD  non-working status after receiving notification of TWFR or beginning TWFR the  employee then is on LTD status only and the position is considered vacant.
VSDP  Long-Term Working Disability Benefits
An employee on LTD-Working status under the Virginia  Sickness and Disability Program may receive notice that his or her position  will be subject to a TWFR.  Benefits  provided to employees will not be reduced because of TWFR status. The employee  may not use annual, compensatory or overtime leave to restore his or her salary  to 100% income replacement but may use disability credits to receive 100%  income replacement. The agency will be responsible for payment for disability  credits   used.
While in TWFR employees in LTD-Working status will  receive disability benefits from the Third Party Administrator at 60% of  pre-disability salary. The employee will continue to be considered in  LTD-Working status and will receive the employer-paid portion of health care  and life insurance premiums. Employees will not be eligible for the health  insurance credit.
Workers’  Compensation
Employees placed on TWFR non-working status who are  receiving Workers’ Compensation benefits will continue to receive these  benefits while authorized. Employees not under VSDP who normally would receive  an agency supplement will not receive this supplement during non-working TWFR.
Annual, compensatory or overtime leave, and family and  personal leave may not be used to supplement salary to receive 100% income  replacement for non-VSDP or VSDP employees receiving benefits.  Employees receiving VSDP benefits may use  Disability Credits to restore their salary to 100%.
Employees placed on TWFR reduced hours who are  receiving Workers’ Compensation benefits or who have been returned to modified  duty through Workers’ Compensation may be eligible to receive the Workers’  Compensation benefit.
NOTE:  Each case  must be evaluated individually to determine whether employees will be entitled  to receive these benefits.  Agencies must  contact the Workers’ Compensation Office at least two weeks prior to placing on  TWFR an employee who is receiving Workers’ Compensation benefits to ensure that  benefits are coordinated accurately.
Filing  VSDP Claims During TWFR
Reduced Hours  – The disability benefit for employees who file  VSDP claims while in TWFR reduced hours will be based on the employee’s salary  while working reduced hours. When employee reverts to a non-reduced schedule  his or her disability benefit will be calculated on his or her pre-TWFR salary.  If the employee continues to be disabled during the remaining scheduled TWFR,  the disability benefit will be based on the pre-TWFR salary.
Example: The employee’s hours are reduced to 20 hours  per week for two weeks each month for 12 months. During the 2nd  two-week reduction the employee files a VSDP claim, serves the 7-calendar-day  waiting period, and begins receiving STD benefit on the 8th day at  100%. The benefit is based on reduced schedule salary, but will revert to  pre-TWFR salary when the end of the two week reduction expires. If the employee  remains disabled for the remainder of the scheduled TWFR, the employee’s STD  benefit will be based on pre-TWFR salary.
Non-Working  Status  –  Employees who file VSDP claims while on TWFR non-working status will not be  able to receive STD income replacement benefits until their schedule reverts to  working status.  At that time employees  must serve a 7-calendar-day waiting period before receiving STD benefits. The  180- calendar-day period begins on the first day of the 7-calendar-day waiting  period.
Leaves of Absence With Pay
Employees  who are on Family and Medical Leave or other Leaves of Absence With Pay,  including absences for illness or disability, are considered active employees. If their positions are identified for TWFR they will be notified and provided  appropriate benefits.
Use of Previously Approved Leave During TWFR
The agency must retract approval for any  part of previously requested leave no longer scheduled as work time because of  a TWFR. 
For example, a full-time employee has asked to  use annual leave for Monday through Friday of the second week of July. After  the request  is approved, a TWFR involving that employee’s position is imposed. Under TWFR,  the employee’s schedule has been reduced and she does not work on  Wednesdays.  Therefore, the employee  cannot use leave to cover Wednesday of the week that had been approved for  annual leave. If the TWFR had eliminated all work hours for July, the entire  week would have to be taken without pay.
Impact of TWFR on  Benefits
During  a TWFR an employee’s benefits are affected as follows:
NOTE:   Benefits for employees on a combination of reduced hours and non-working  status will be determined by their status at the time.
Annual  Leave Accrual
Reduced Hours  – Employees will accrue annual leave on  a prorated basis, according to the percentage of full-time hours they are  scheduled to work during a pay period.
Example: A full-time employee whose work hours  are reduced during a TWFR to 40% of 40 hours per week (16 hours per week) per  pay period will earn annual leave at 40% of the full accrual rate.
Non-Working  Status  –  Employees will not accrue annual leave during pay periods when they are not  scheduled to work.
Traditional  Sick Leave Accrual
Reduced  Hours  –  Employees will accrue traditional sick leave on a prorated basis, according to  the percentage of full-time hours they are scheduled to work during a pay  period.  See example above.
Non-Working  Status  –  Employees will not accrue traditional sick leave during pay periods when they  are not scheduled to work.
VSDP  Sick and Family and Personal Leave -STD and LTD-Working
Reduced  Hours  –  Employees in TWFR status who are working reduced hours on January 10 will  receive the allotment of VSDP leave on January 10 for current part-time  employees based on their months of state service. When they return to a  full-time work schedule, their allotment will be increased to the appropriate  full-time amount. (Used leave will not be replaced.)
Non-Working  Status  –  Employees in TWFR non-working status on January 10 will not receive the VSDP  leave credits until they return from TWFR.
Disability  Credits
Non-Working  or Reduced Hours  –  Employees receiving STD or LTD-working disability benefits may use disability  credits during periods of TWFR to restore salary to 100% income  replacement.  Disability credits must be  used in increments of 8 hours.
Leave  Balances
Annual,  Traditional Sick, Compensatory, and Overtime Leave  – Balances are retained.  Leave may be used as appropriate to cover  absences from scheduled work time  for employees working reduced hours.
Agencies  may extend the compensatory leave expiration date to account for periods of  non-working TWFR.
Holidays
An employee working reduced hours under TWFR will be  entitled to receive holiday pay or compensatory time for a holiday only for the  number of hours that he or she is scheduled to work that day.
For example, if an employee whose work hours are reduced  is not scheduled to work on Mondays, he or she is ineligible for holiday pay  for any holidays that fall on Monday.   However, if the employee is scheduled to work 8 hours on Mondays, he  will receive pay for the holiday.
An employee on TWFR non-working status does not receive  pay or compensatory time for any holidays that occur during the TWFR period.
NOTE:  In assigning holidays to a TWFR schedule,  agencies should consider potential inequities and employee morale issues.
Service  Credit for Leave
Reduced Hours and Non-Working Status  – Employees whose hours are reduced or  who are placed in a non-working status will receive full service credit during  the period of TWFR for the purpose of determining their years of service as  they affect the following:
Annual  leave accrual rate;
VSDP months of service.
Service  Credit for Retirement
If  an employee on TWFR earns any pay during a month, his or her agency will make  its retirement contribution based on the employee’s full salary before TWFR,  and the employee will receive service credit towards retirement for the entire  month at the pre-TWFR salary.
If  an employee on TWFR has no earnings during a month, the agency will not make a  retirement contribution and the employee will not receive retirement service  credit for that month.
Service Credit for Employees  Receiving VSDP Benefits
A  VSDP-participating employee on TWFR, whether in reduced hours or non-working  status, who is receiving STD benefits  will continue to receive the full  retirement contribution and service credit. Employees receiving LTD benefits  will receive service credit only.
Healthcare  Insurance
Agencies  will continue to pay the state portion of the health insurance premiums for  employees on TWFR, whether reduced hours, non-working, or a combination status.  Agencies should inform employees of alternatives for paying the employee share  of their premiums if payroll deduction is no longer suitable.
Life  Insurance
Agencies will continue to pay the life insurance premiums  for employees during TWFR based on the employees’ pre-TWFR compensation.
If an employee should die during a TWFR, his or  her beneficiaries would be entitled to benefits based on the employee’s  regular, pre-TWFR compensation.
Optional  Life Insurance
Impact on Probationary Period
Reduced  Hours  –  Reduced hours under TWFR do not affect the duration of an employee’s  probationary period.
Non-Working  Status  –  An employee’s probationary period is extended by the amount of time the  employee is in a non-working status under TWFR if the non-working status  included a period of more than 14 consecutive days.
Unemployment Compensation
Employees  on TWFR may be eligible to receive Unemployment Compensation.  Decisions are made by the Virginia Employment  Commission.
AUTHORITY
This  policy is issued by the Department of Human Resource Management pursuant to the  authority provided in Chapter 12, Title 2.2, of the Code of Virginia.
INTERPRETATION
The  Director of the Department of Human Resource Management is responsible for  official interpretation of this policy, in accordance with Section 2.2-1201(13)  of the Code of Virginia
Questions  regarding application of this policy should be directed to the Department of  Human Resource Management’s Office of Agency Human Resource Services.  The Department of Human Resource Management  reserves the right to revise or eliminate this policy as necessary.
RELATED POLICIES
