1. Labour Relations in the Hotel and Catering Sectors
Cyprus supports a voluntary system of labour relations. This means that the social partners are free to agree the terms and conditions of employment and government intervention (i.e. Labour Law) is limited to setting the minimum standards for the terms and conditions of employment (Mainstream Labour Law) and to offering protection for vulnerable groups of employees (Specialised Labour Law).
After the establishment of the Republic of Cyprus, in 1960, the Social Partners signed the so-called Basic Agreement - a voluntary agreement - laying out procedures for the settlement of labour disputes and concluding collective agreements. This agreement was, in 1977, succeeded by the Industrial Relations Code, which is also a voluntary agreement (not legally enforceable) that lays out the procedures to be followed for the settlement of labour disputes, and the procedures to be followed for arbitration, mediation and public inquiry in disputes over interests and disputes over rights.
In relation to the Labour Laws in the Hotel and Catering sectors, the terms and conditions of employment are regulated both by the Mainstream Labour Legislation, which mainly consists of Laws that harmonise E.U Directives in the area of Labour Law and the Specialised Laws that regulate the minimum standards for the terms and conditions of employment.
With regards to collective agreements, sectoral agreements are in force between employer organisations and trade unions. In the hotel industry, the employers are represented by PASYXE and EXEK-STEK and in the catering industry, they are represented by OSIKA. Employees are being represented through three trade unions, namely, OYXEV-SEK , SYXKA-PEO and ALLAGI-DEOK .
2. Specialised Labour Legislation for the Terms and Conditions of Employment in the Hotel and Catering industries
The Legislation that regulates the terms and conditions of employment in the catering industry came into force in 1968 and the one regulating the terms and condition of employment in the hotel industry came into force in 1972. Both Laws with their subsequent amendments are still in force. These two pieces of Legislation and their main provisions are the:
(a) Catering Employees (Conditions of Service) Laws of 1968 to 2002 :
Every employer is obliged to provide a professional booklet to all employees. The booklet contains the employee’s personal details, his/her qualifications and his/her service in the industry. No employer can employ any employee without a professional booklet.
Maximum weekly working hours are 48 including overtime . Overtime should not be more than 8 hours weekly .
Maximum daily working hours are 8 with no more than 1 interruption (2 split shifts).
Minimum compensation for overtime work payment of 1,5 hour for every 1  hour of work.
A minimum of 1 rest-day per week should be allowed (35 continuous hours).
Minimum annual leave is regulated to 20 days for a 5-day working week and to 24 for a 6-day working week. Seasonal employees are allowed a proportion according to their service.
Minimum sick leave with pay is regulated:
- Service between 6 months and 3 years: 10 days.
- Service more than 3 years: 18 days
- 3 first days are without pay and Social Insurance payments are deducted from pay.
The employer or the employee, depending on the party that terminates the employment relationship, is obliged to give a specific period of notice (according to the length of service) or to pay the corresponding compensation. Special provisions regulate increased notice or compensation during the summer period.
A 10% service charge is charged on the bills for the provision of services. The total amount collected is distributed to the employees every month.
Employers are obliged to display in the establishment:
- List of the employees and their corresponding occupation.
- Table showing daily working hours, weekly rest-day, annual leave with pay and service charge allowance.
(b) Hotel Employees (Conditions of Service) Regulations of 1972 to 2002 .
Every employer is obliged to provide a professional booklet to all employees. The booklet contains employee’s personal details, his/her qualifications and his/her service in the industry. No employer can employ any employee without a professional booklet.
Maximum weekly working hours are 48 including overtime . Overtimes should not be more than 9 hours weekly .
Maximum daily working hours are 8 and these hours can be distributed in a period not exceeding 13 hours with no more than 2 interruptions (3 split shifts).
Minimum compensation for overtime work payment of 1,5 hour for every 1  hour of work.
A minimum of 1 rest-day per week should be allowed (35 continuous hours).
Minimum annual leave is regulated to 20 days for a 5-day working week and to 24 for a 6-day working week. Seasonal employees are allowed a proportion according to their service.
Minimum sick leave with pay is regulated:
- Service between 6 months and 3 years: 15 days.
- Service more than 3 years: 24 days
- 3 first days are without pay and Social Insurance payments are deducted from pay.
Female employees are allowed maternity payment from their employer equalling to a minimum of 6 half weekly salaries.
During the first month of service, termination of employment can take place without any obligation on the part of the employer or the employee. After that, the employer or the employee, depending on the party that terminates the employment relationship, is obliged to give a specific period of notice (according to the length of service) or to pay the corresponding compensation. Special provisions regulate increased notice or compensation during the summer period.
A 10% service charge is charged on the bills for the provision of services. The total amount collected is distributed to the employees every month.
Employers are obliged to display in the establishment:
- List of the employees and their corresponding occupation.
- Table showing daily working hours, weekly rest-day, annual leave with pay and service charge allowance.
In addition to the above Legislation, Mainstream Labour Laws apply to the employees of these industries.
3. Collective Agreements
In both the hotel and the catering industries, sectoral collective agreements are in force. Although, these agreements are not legally binding, all hoteliers, with few exceptions, follow the provisions of these agreements for trade union members. In the catering industry, the agreement is not applied at the same level as the hotel industry, although a good majority of the employers are attaining the provisions of the agreement.
Collective agreements are concluded through the mechanisms instituted by the Industrial Relations Code. Breaches of these agreements are also solved through the abovementioned mechanisms. These mechanisms involve, direct negotiations between the trade unions and the employer and his/her representatives. If no solution is found at this stage, the Ministry of Labour and Social Insurance offers mediation services, through our Department. Finally, trade unions and employers have the right to submit their dispute to an independent arbitrator or to a public inquiry committee.
(a) Collective Agreement in the HOTEL INDUSTRY
The main provisions of the collective agreement in the hotel industry are the following:
5-day working week with the normal weekly working hours fixed to 38 and the normal daily working hours to 7 hours and 36 minutes. An agreement for flexible working hours is also in force.
Rest hours are set to a minimum of 11 continuous hours daily and 35 weekly.
Special provisions apply for continuous and split shifts.
All employees are allowed particular breaks for breakfast and lunch/dinner.
Compensation for Sunday can either be in money or time and it is 50% more than the daily wage or working time.
Allowance for shift work is18% of the salary (a maximum applies).
Allowance for night shift is 20% of the salary (restrictions apply).
Overtime work is compensated as follows:
- Weekdays: 1:1.5,
- Overtime after midnight: 1:2.
Public holidays with pay are: 01/01, 06/01, Green Monday, 25/03, 01/04, Good Friday, Easter Sunday, Easter Monday, 01/05, Holy Spirit Monday, 15/08, 01/10, 28/10, 25/12, 26/12. When a public holiday coincides with a day-off, it is being replaced with another day or compensated.
Annual leave with pay is as follows:
- Industry service between 1 and 4 years: 20 working days,
- Industry service between 4 and 10 years: 21 working days,
- Industry service of more than 10 years and service of 2 years with the same employer: 23 working days.
Sick leave with pay (with medical certificate, first 3 days not paid and benefits from Social Insurance Fund deducted from earnings) is as follows:
- Industry service between 6 months and 3 years: 20 consecutive days,
- Industry service of more than 3 years: 32 consecutive days.
Maternity leave is 16 weeks. For employees with more than 6 months of service, the employer supplements the allowance of the Social Insurance Fund up to a maximum of 40% of the employee’s salary.
Medical and pharmaceutical treatment is offered through the trade unions’ Medical Schemes for which both employers and employees contribute.
During the period between 01/11 of one year and 31/03 of the next, hotels may choose to suspend their operation. During this period, specific clauses of the collective agreement regulate employment in the hotel industry.
Hotels provide special uniforms free.
Employees on duty over usual meal hours are offered lunch.
Specific transport arrangements apply.
Basic wages (i.e. deflated) are being determined by the basic wage scales, which provide for the starting salary. A wage scale applies to a group of hotel occupations. On top of the basic wage, cost of living allowance is provided.
Annual increases are fixed according to the wage scale.
A 13th salary is paid on 20/12 of each year (a proportion is paid to employees with less than 12 months of service).
An Easter bonus is also paid 5 days before Easter (30% of the monthly salary) to employees with more than 10 months of employment with the same employer.
A provident fund is in operation in the industry. Both employers and employees contribute to this fund. Payments to employees are made when they leave the industry. The amount to be paid is regulated by the provident fund’s internal regulations.
More details on this collective agreement can be found by contacting either the Trade Unions or Employer Organsations.
(b) Collective Agreement in the CATERING INDUSTRY
The main provisions of the collective agreement in the catering industry are the following:
6-day working week with the normal weekly working hours fixed to 40 and the normal daily working hours to 7.
Rest hours are set to a minimum of 11 continuous hours daily and 35 weekly.
All employees are allowed breaks for lunch/dinner.
Special provisions apply for split shifts.
Overtime work is compensated as follows
- Weekdays: 1:1.5,
- Sundays and public holidays, 1:2.
Public holidays with pay are: 01/01, 06/01, Green Monday, 25/03, 01/04, Good Thursday, Good Friday, Good Saturday, Easter Sunday, Easter Monday, 01/05, 15/08, 01/10, 28/10 and 25/12. When a public holiday coincides with a day-off, it is being replaced
The annual leave with pay is as follows:
- Industry service up to 2 years: 33 working days,
- Industry service between 2 and 4 years: 34 working days,
- Industry service between 4 and 9 years: 35 working days,
- Industry service of more than 10 years and service of 5 years with the same employer: 36 working days,
- Industry service of more than 10 years and service of 6 years with the same employer: 37 working days.
Sick leave with pay (with medical certificate, first 3 days not paid and benefits from Social Insurance Fund deducted from earnings) is as follows:
- Industry service between 6 months and 3 years: 22 consecutive days,
- Industry service between 3 and 5 years: 36 consecutive days.
Maternity leave is 16 weeks. The employer supplements the allowance by the Social Insurance Fund up to a maximum of 50% of the employee’s salary.
Medical and pharmaceutical treatment is offered through the trade unions’ Medical Schemes for which both employers and employees contribute.
During the period between 01/11 of one year and 31/03 of the next, catering establishments may choose to suspend their operation. During this period, specific clauses of the collective agreement regulate employment in the catering industry
The employer provides special uniforms free.
Specific transport arrangements apply.
Basic wages (i.e. deflated) are determined by the basic wage scales, which provide for the starting salary. A wage scale applies to a group of hotel occupations. On top of the basic wage, cost of living allowance is provided.
Annual increases are fixed according to the wage scale.
13th salary is paid on the Christmas period of each year (a proportion is paid to employees with less than 12 months of service).
A provident fund is in operation in the industry. Both employers and employees contribute to this fund. Payments to employees are made when they leave the industry. The amount to be paid is regulated by the provident fund’s internal regulations.
Special provisions apply for Sunday work allowance and night work allowance.
More details on this collective agreement can be found by contacting either the Trade Unions  (
OYXEV-SEK
