Those Subject to Provisions
The disciplinary     procedures described below are those set forth in statute. The     contracts negotiated between State employee unions and the Governor's     Office of Employee Relations have substituted "Contract     Disciplinary Procedures" for these provisions. Thus, the     following information applies mainly to Managerial/Confidential     employees and persons not in a negotiating unit or subject to     the Taylor Law.
CSL §
75.1
Employees who are subject to the provisions     of Section 75 may not be removed or otherwise subjected to disciplinary     penalty except for incompetency or misconduct established after     a hearing on stated charges.
CSL §
4.5(b)(5)(ii)
The provisions of the Civil Service Law dealing with removal for incompetency or misconduct     apply to permanent competitive class employees, and, except as     noted below, honorably discharged war veterans and exempt volunteer     firefighters holding a position by permanent appointment in the     classified service. State and local employees holding non-competitive     class position by permanent appointment for at least five years     are likewise covered. In addition, a probationer who has not     completed eight weeks of service is entitled to notice and hearing     pursuant to Section 75 if he/she is to be removed from the position     for misconduct or incompetence before the end of the minimum     probationary period. However, such individuals may be terminated     without recourse to Section 75 after eight weeks and up to the     end of the maximum period of their probationary term.
CSL §
75.1(c)
A war veteran and an     exempt volunteer firefighter serving in the exempt, non-competitive     or labor class, is not covered by Section 75 if he/she holds     the position of private secretary, cashier or deputy of any official     or department. In addition, if the Civil Service Commission designates     a non-competitive class position as confidential or policy influencing,     the incumbent is not protected by the provisions of Section 75.
CSL §
75-b
Under certain circumstances, public employees     are protected against retaliatory disciplinary action resulting     from their disclosure of information that relates to what the     employee reasonably believes to be a violation of law, rule or     regulation.
Investigations
Frequently,     charges are preceded by an investigation by the appointing authority.     It is well established that an appointing officer has the right     to question an employee with respect to matters involving or     affecting job performance and that an employee is obligated to     answer such questions. Refusal to answer constitutes insubordination.     The appointing officer may question the employee under oath,     and have the questions and answers recorded. Any employee, including     managerial/confidential, who appears to be a potential subject     of disciplinary action, has, at the time of questioning, a right     to representation and shall be notified in advance, in writing,     of this right.
Charges
Charges of misconduct        or incompetency, under Section 75, must be brought within 18 months of the act or omission unless the charge would constitute a crime if proved in        a court of competent jurisdiction. For managerial/confidential employees        or those employees covered by a collective bargaining agreement, the period        is reduced to one year. The charges must be in writing and sufficiently        specific to apprise the employee of what he/she is being charged with to        enable him/her to defend him/herself. The charges may be served on the employee        personally or by mail. The individual is then entitled to at least eight        days in which to answer the charges in writing.
Hearings
The hearing     must be conducted by the officer or body having the power to     remove the person or by a deputy or other person designated,     in writing, by that officer or body. The burden of proving the     charges rests on the official or supervisor making the charges.
The employee is entitled     to be represented by counsel or a union official, to summon witnesses     to testify on his/her behalf at the hearing, and to confront     and cross-examine those testifying against him/her.
CSL §  75.3
Case law requires     that the hearing be open to the public; however, it may be closed     if the employee so requests. A transcript of the hearing is required,     and the determination of the appointing officer must be in writing     and supported by substantial evidence in the record.
If found guilty of     some or all of the charge(s), an employee's entire work history     may be considered in setting the penalty to be imposed.
Suspension/Dismissal
If the employee     is suspended pending the hearing and determination of charges     and is subsequently found not guilty, he/she is entitled to reinstatement     with back pay, less any unemployment benefits. If found guilty,     he/she may be:
dismissed or demoted,
fined an amount not exceeding $100       to be deducted from his/her salary, or
reprimanded.
The statute permits the appointing officer to suspend          an employee without pay for up to 30 days pending a hearing and determination          of disciplinary charges. Such a suspension is procedural only and not          a penalty. Thus, if an employee is found guilty and receives a reprimand,          he/she is not entitled to back pay for the period of suspension. However,          the statute permits an appointing officer, in his/her discretion, to consider          the suspension as part of the penalty. The appointing authority should          be prepared to defend at the hearing a determination to impose a suspension          without pay. Prior to initiating a suspension without pay, an employee          must be provided with a notice of the charge lodged or to be lodged, an          explanation of the evidence and an opportunity to present reasons not          to impose the suspension.
An employee who is     found guilty is entitled, upon request, to be furnished a copy     of the transcript of the hearing without charge. Also, when an     employee is found guilty, a copy of the charges, the written     answer, the transcript of the hearing and the determination must     be placed on file in the office of the department or agency in     which he/she has been employed. Copies must be filed with the     State Civil Service Commission.
Appeals
An employee     who is dismissed, demoted, suspended without pay, fined or reprimanded,     unaccompanied by a remittance of his/her prehearing suspension     without pay, may appeal either to the State Civil Service Commission     or to the courts. If he/she elects to appeal to the Commission,     the appeal must be filed in writing within 20 days after receipt     of the written notice of the determination.
CSL §  76.2
The Commission reviews     the record of the disciplinary proceeding and the transcript     of the hearing, and makes a determination on the basis of such     record and transcript and such oral or written argument as it     may deem necessary. No new evidence may be presented before the     State Civil Service Commission or its designated representative.     The record is reviewed to determine whether the decision of the     appointing officer is based on substantial evidence, whether     procedural rights and safeguards have been observed, and whether     the penalty imposed is reasonable in light of all the circumstances.
CSL §  76.3
The Commission may affirm,     reverse or modify the determination appealed. It may, in its     discretion, direct the reinstatement of the employee or permit     transfer to a vacancy in a similar position in another division     or department, or direct that the employee's name be placed on     a preferred list. In appropriate circumstances the Commission     may arrange a transfer of the employee, in order to avoid the     difficult and unproductive work situation that might ensue were     he/she returned to his/her former job. The employee is entitled     to back pay for the period of his/her removal less unemployment     insurance benefits. No adjustment is made for other earnings     during that time.
CSL §  50.4
66.4(d)
If a person is disqualified     after having received appointment, the appointment is, in effect,     declared void and the person is not entitled to the protection     of Section 75. However, such people do have certain due process     rights pursuant to Section 50.4.
POL §
75
In addition, a public     officer who is convicted of a felony or a crime involving a violation     of his/her oath of office, vacates his/her position without recourse     to Section 75.
Length of Leave
Any employee who is        disabled due to an injury that is compensable under the Workers' Compensation        Law is entitled to a cumulative leave of absence, while actually disabled,        for a period of one year or, if disabled due to an assault on the job for        a period of two years, unless the employee is found to be permanently disabled        from performing the duties of the job. The employee may be separated upon        expiration of the leave, or upon a finding of permanent inability to perform        the job duties. However, the employee has a right to a hearing to challenge        a refusal to permit return to duty, or a proposed discharge upon exhaustion        of leave or finding of permanent disability. After separation, the employee        may apply within one year of recovery, for reinstatement to his/her former        job, or a similar job for which he/she is qualified. If he/she is found        fit to perform the duties of his/her former position, but no appropriate        vacancy shall exist, or if the workload does not warrant filling such vacancy,        his/her name shall be placed upon a preferred list.
Medical Examinations
An appointing     officer may have reasonable grounds to believe that an employee     is unable to perform the duties of his/her position due to a     physical or mental disability resulting from circumstances other     than occupational injury or disease. If so, the appointing officer     may require a medical examination of the employee, after giving     the employee written notice of the facts that led to this conclusion.     Upon examination, if the medical officer certifies that the employee     is not physically or mentally fit to perform the job duties,     the appointing authority will notify the employee in writing.     The employee has the right to request a hearing to appeal the     determination. Except where the employee's continued presence     on the job presents a potential danger or would severely interfere     with operations--in which case the employee may be placed on     leave immediately--an employee is kept on the job until a final     determination is made after a hearing or the end of the appeal     process, whichever is later. The employee who refuses to submit     to an examination is considered insubordinate, and this can be     the basis for disciplinary action.
Termination/Reinstatement
An employee     placed on leave pursuant to CSL Section 72 or who is voluntarily     on leave by reason of a non-occupational injury or disease, may     be terminated after a continuous absence of one year. An employee     may, within one year of the termination of the disability, apply     for reinstatement. If the person is found mentally and physically     able to return to work, but an appropriate position is not available,     the individual will be placed on a preferred list.
Additional Credits for Examination
The State     Constitution requires that examinations for appointment or promotion     in State service be competitive, so far as practicable. At the     same time, it contains a significant exception to the strict     rule of competition by giving additional credits in competitive     examinations to war veterans. Disabled veterans receive 10 points     additional credit on their examination scores in open-competitive     examinations and five points in promotion examinations. Non-disabled     veterans are granted five points in open-competitive examinations     and two and one-half points in promotion examinations. In every     case, however, the veteran must attain a passing mark on an examination     before additional credits may be added to his/her score. The     additional credits may not be applied to raise a failing grade     to a passing one.
were members of the Armed            Forces of the United States;
served on active duty for other than training purposes in time of war;
were discharged honorably,            released under honorable circumstances, or will be honorably discharged            or released under honorable circumstances at the time of appointment;            and
are residents of New York            State at the time of application for appointment, promotion or retention,            as the case may be.
A veteran who is disabled is          defined as someone who meets the above service criteria and is certified          by the United States Department of Veterans Affairs [formerly known as          the Veterans Administration] as having a disability rated at ten percent          of more which was incurred while serving in the United States Armed Forces          in time of war. The disability must be in existence and the disabled veteran          must be receiving payment from the Department of Veterans Affairs for          such disability at the time of application for appointment or retention.
Time of War
Time of war     means: for World War I, from April 6, 1917 to November 11, 1918;     for World War II, from December 7, 1941 to December 31, 1946;     for the Korean Conflict, from June 27, 1950 to January 31, 1955;     for the Vietnam Conflict, from December 22, 1961 to May 7, 1975;     and for hostilities in the Persian Gulf, from August 2, 1990     to the end of such hostilities. In addition, those who were awarded     the armed forces, navy or marine corps expeditionary medal during     the following periods will qualify: for hostilities in Lebanon,     from June 1, 1983 to December 1, 1987; for hostilities in Grenada,     from October 23, 1983 to November 21, 1983; and for hostilities     in Panama, from December 20, 1989 to January 31, 1990. In addition,     men and women qualify for veterans' credits if they were a member     of the United States Public Health Service from July 29, 1945     to December 31, 1946, from June 27, 1950 to July 3, 1952, or     if disabled while serving as a Merchant Seaman or while on transport     service duty, between December 7, 1941 and August 15, 1945.
Further, a person qualifies for     veterans' credits provided he/she became disabled while serving     overseas as a United States civilian employed by the American     Field Service under United States Armies and United States Army     Groups during armed conflict from December 7, 1941 to May 8,     1945, and was honorably discharged or released. A person also     qualifies for veterans' credits provided he/she became disabled     while serving overseas as a United States Civilian Flight Crew     and Aviation Ground Support Employee of Pan American World Airways     or one of its subsidiaries or its affiliates as a result of Pan     American's contract with Air Transport Command or Naval Air Transport     Service during armed conflict from December 14, 1941 to August     14, 1945, and was honorably discharged or released.
Use of Credits
It should     be noted that additional credits are applied to a qualifying     candidate's score only at the time the eligible list is established.     An individual must apply for and prove eligibility for such credit before  the eligible list is established, otherwise, it     will be too late for him/her to receive credits on that list.     By law a list cannot be established until two months after the     last day allowed for filing applications for an examination.     This assures veterans at least two months in which to apply and     demonstrate eligibility for credits.
CSL §  85.4
A veteran may receive additional credits     in any or all examinations in which he/she is a successful candidate,     up to the time that the additional credits are actually used     to obtain an appointment or promotion. That is, these credits     are added to passing scores on any number of eligible lists;     however, a veteran is only entitled to obtain one appointment     resulting from these additional credits.
Credits are deemed to be used when a     veteran receives a permanent appointment or promotion in the     service of the State or a civil division from an eligible list     on which he/she was allowed (and had not waived) additional credits,     either as a disabled or a non-disabled veteran. The additional     credits are not deemed to be used if:
the relative rank of the appointee on the eligible list or on the certification thereof from which       the appointment or promotion is made has not been affected by       the additional credits, or
the appointee resigns or is terminated       at or before the end of his/her probationary term and thus does       not acquire permanent status.
CSL §  85.5
A veteran may elect to waive or relinquish     additional credits on any examination at any time before appointment     or promotion, and accept the lower rank on the eligible list     to which he/she is otherwise entitled. If the veteran does this,     his/her credits cannot be restored on that list.
Preference In Retention
Another important     benefit granted to disabled and non-disabled veterans is the     right of preference in retention in the event of a reduction     in force in the competitive class. This preference has already     been noted in the discussion on layoffs. The qualifications for     eligibility for additional examination credits also apply to     eligibility for preference in retention.
War Veterans and Exempt Volunteer Firefighters
The Civil     Service Law also contains provisions favoring war veterans and     exempt volunteer firefighters who are laid off upon the abolition     of positions in the non-competitive or labor jurisdictional class.     The law provides that if the non-competitive or labor class position     of a veteran or exempt volunteer firefighter is abolished, he/she     shall be entitled to transfer to any similar position where a     vacancy exists and receive the same compensation. He/she does     not have a right to bump a non-veteran, nor does the law mean     that a veteran or exempt volunteer firefighter must be given     a vacant position even if there are no duties to perform in the     position. In other words, it does not mandate the filling of     a position that would otherwise stay vacant because of lack of     work. However, it does give the laid off war veteran or exempt     volunteer firefighter the right of preference to employment in     similar positions over others who might otherwise be appointed     to such positions. It is incumbent upon the veteran to seek and     find such positions.
Military Service and Leaves of Absence
The rights and privileges        of public employees who enter military service are provided for in the Military        Law, principally in Sections 242 and 243. The former section deals with        members of reserve forces who perform ordered military duty in the service        of New York State or the United States. The latter deals with the rights        of those inducted into, or whose National Guard units are activated into,        the regular military forces of the United States.
38USC§  4302
Additional rights are guaranteed by federal     law. In addition, federal law provides that veterans shall be     accorded the protections of federal or state law, whichever is     more generous.
ML §  242.1
242.3
A civil service        employee who is a member of the organized militia or any or the reserve        forces of the Armed Forces of the United States shall be deemed to be on        leave of absence while performing ordered military duty. Ordered military        duty is defined as any duty performed pursuant to orders issued without        the employee's consent; or even though such orders are issued with the consent        of the employee, for periods not exceeding a total of 30 calendar days or        22 working days in one calendar year, or any continuour period of absense.
ML §  242.3
242.3-a
A civil service employee who is a member     of a reserve component shall be deemed to be on leave of absence     while attending any service school conducted by the Armed Forces,     or while in full-time training or active duty for training, even     though such orders are issued with the consent of the employee.
ML §  242.4
An employee's absence while performing     ordered military leave shall not constitute an interruption of     continuous employment nor shall there be any loss of vacation     or holiday privilege.
ML §  242.5
A reservist shall be paid his/her salary     for all periods of absence while performing military duty, not     exceeding a total of 30 calendar days or 22 work days, whichever     is greater, during any one calendar year of any continuous period     of ordered military service. This period may be extended by rule     in times of emergency.
ML §
4302
An employee who enlists in the Armed Forces     is entitled to a maximum four-year leave of absence, except during     a period of war or national emergency declared by the President;     or for one additional year, if service is extended for the convenience     of the government.
ML §  243.1(c)
In order to be eligible for reinstatement     following military duty or for any of the rights and benefits     granted to returning veterans under the Military Law, a veteran     must be honorably discharged or released under honorable circumstances.
ML §  243.2
Military Law        provides that any employee who enlists or is drafted into military duty        shall be deemed to be on leave of absence and is entitled to reinstatement        to his/her position if application is made up to 90 days after the termination        of military duty as defined in such section. Even if reinstatement is not        requested within the 90 day period, the employee remains eligible for reinstatement        at the discretion of the appointing officer at any time within one year        after the termination of military duty.
ML §  243.5
An employee on military leave may "not     be subjected directly or indirectly to any loss of time, service,     increment or any other right or privilege, or be prejudiced in     any way with reference to promotion, transfer, reinstatement     or continuance in office." Thus, upon reinstatement following     termination of military duty, an employee is entitled to receive     the same salary he/she would otherwise be receiving had he/she     remained in his/her position, and full credit, for promotional     purposes, for the period of absence.
Entitlement to Examinations
The Military Law provides        certain rights pertaining to civil service examinations. A person serving        on active duty in the armed forces of the United States during the filing        period for a civil service examination, or a person who has been honorably        discharged after an examination filing period shall be permitted to file        an application for such examination no later than 10 business days prior        to the scheduled examination date or the last date to file for such examination,        whichever is later. If qualified, such person shall be allowed to compete        in such examination. Further, any member of the Armed Forces of the United        States who duly filed an application for a civil service examination but        was deprived of an opportunity to compete because of active military duty        shall be afforded a military make-up examination.
ML §  243.5
If a public employee is on regular military     duty and a promotion examination is held for which the employee     is entitled to take, the employee may take a comparable examination     if a request is made within 60 days after restoration to his/her     position. If the employee passes the comparable examination,     his/her name is placed on the regular eligible list, provided     it still exists. If the final rating is such that the employee     would have been reached for certification for appointment between     the date when he/she entered military duty and the date that     he/she was officially notified of his/her rating, his/her name     is placed on a special eligible list. The special list remains     in existence for two years and is certified before any subsequent     list, including a preferred list. If the employee is promoted     from the special eligible list, he/she is entitled to retroactive     seniority, for purposes of computing seniority, training and     experience credit upon promotion to the earliest date on which     any eligible who was ranked lower on the regular promotion list     was promoted. The employee is not, however, entitled to have     seniority backdated for salary purposes.
Appointment While on Military Duty
Military Law also          provides that if a person's name is on an open-competitive or promotion          eligible list when he/she enlists or is drafted into military duty, that          person may, at the discretion of the appointing officer, be appointed          from such list and then placed on military leave of absence until he/she          returns from military duty. In such case, he/she earns seniority and salary          credit from the date of appointment. A person on an eligible list who is not so appointed while on regular military duty may have his/her name          placed on a special eligible list following return, provided the person          has been reached for certification during military duty and the original          eligible list is still in existance..
Such a special list will continue for     a period of two years following termination of military duty     and is certified before any subsequent eligible lists, including     a preferred list. If an eligible is appointed from such a special     list, he/she is entitled to retroactive seniority for the purposes     of computing seniority, training and experience credit upon promotion,     and seniority in the event of layoff, to the earliest date upon     which any eligible who was lower on the original list was appointed.
Credit Toward Probationary Requirements
If a person     enters military duty other than reserve or National Guard service     while serving a probationary period, the time absent on military     duty shall be credited as satisfactory probationary service.     This does not, however, overcome unsatisfactory probationary     service rendered before entering military duty nor may it guarantee     the employee successful completion of the probationary term.
Age Requirements
Military     Law also provides that if maximum age requirements are established     for any position, the period of military duty served by a candidate     shall not be included in computing age, up to a maximum of six     years.
Leave for Education
Military Law provides        an educational leave of absence for any employee who served during hostilities        in World War II through the Viet Nam era and is eligible to receive educational        benefits provided by the federal government on account of such service.        Such employee shall be entitled to a leave of absence not exceeding four        years while pursuing courses of studies under such federal benefits.
Rules of Conduct
Unlike federal     employees, most people in the service of the State of New York     are not prohibited from taking part in or contributing to partisan     political campaigns in their off-duty hours. At the same time,     they are protected by the Civil Service Law from having political     influence imposed upon them in their jobs. This law provides     that no employee shall be questioned concerning his/her political     affiliations or compelled to contribute to any political fund,     that no person shall be appointed or discharged on the basis     of political opinions or affiliations and that no person shall     use his/her official position or authority to compel political     action or allegiance from subordinates.
Federally Funded State Agencies
State employees     whose principal employment is in connection with an activity     financed in whole or in part by federal loans or grants are subject     to the Hatch Act, which is a federal law prohibiting them from     engaging in certain political activities. Examples of prohibited     activities are running as a partisan candidate for political     office or using official authority for the purposes of interfering     with or affecting the results of an election. Also prohibited     is the coercion of public employees to make loans or contributions     to a political party.
However, the law does not prohibit an     employee from expressing opinions, making voluntary political     contributions or displaying political badges or stickers in his/her     private home or automobile. Any person who believes that he/she     is covered by this Act should check its specific provisions before     engaging in any political activities.
Strikes
Strikes by public employees against the     State or any public authority or local governmental jurisdiction,     including a school district, are prohibited by Article 14 of     the Civil Service Law, also known as the Taylor Law.
CSL §
210
The statute presumes that an employee who     fails to report for duty, is willfully absent from his/her position,     stops work, or abstains in whole or in part from the full, faithful     and proper performance of employment duties, has engaged in a     strike. Under this broad definition, it would be possible to     have a one-person strike, as concerted action by two or more     employees is not necessary. The statute provides for the loss     of two days' pay for each day the public employee is on strike.
CSR §
Dual Employment
State employees     holding positions in the classified service are prohibited from     obtaining and holding any other paid State position, either on     a full-time or part-time basis, without first obtaining the written     consent of the head of their department or agency. This restriction     on dual employment of classified service employees extends to     second positions in all branches of State government (executive,     legislative and judicial) and to the unclassified service.
POL §
73, 73-a, 74
In addition, outside activities of State     officers and employees are regulated by provisions of the Public     Officers Law relating to ethics.
Financial Disclosure
State officers     and employees who are designated as "policymakers"     by their appointing authority, or who earn in excess of the job     rate of SG-24, as set forth in Section 130(1)(9) of the Civil     Service Law, or above and are not otherwise exempted, must file     an Annual Statement of Financial Disclosure with the State Ethics     Commission. In addition, depending on the amount to be earned,     such persons must obtain the permission of their appointing authority     and, in certain cases, the State Ethics Commission before undertaking     compensated outside activities.
Additional     Agency Restrictions
Even if an individual is not required to obtain such permission,     outside employment must not place an employee in a situation     incompatible with his or her State position, such as presenting     a conflict of interest. Employees who wish to undertake outside     activities should check to see whether the agency they work for     places additional specific restrictions or prohibitions on such     activities. As a general matter, it is expected that outside     employment will be restricted to off-duty hours and will not     mentally or physically impair the employee in performing the     duties of the State position. 19 NYCRR  930  State officers and employees are restricted from certain business     and professional activities, e.g., contracting with a State agency     except pursuant to competitive bidding or accepting gifts valued     at $75 or more given to influence or reward official acts. The     Ethics Commission has interpreted the Ethics Law as prohibiting     the receipt of multiple gifts over a 12-month period that equal     or exceed a value of $75, even though the gifts individually     are worth less than $75. Also, former State officers and employees     may not appear before their former State agency after termination     of service for two years on any matter, or before any State agency     at any time after termination on a matter with which they were     directly concerned and personally participated in while still     in State service. In addition, political activities, and the     receipt of honoraria and travel reimbursement are regulated by     the Ethics Commission, which also renders advisory opinions interpreting     the Public Officers Law provisions addressing ethics and investigates     violations.
100
No payroll may be approved or paid by any State fiscal officer     unless and until the Department of Civil Service certifies to     such officer that the persons to be paid are holding their positions     in accordance with Civil Service Laws and Rules. Payment of an     employee by a fiscal officer after the refusal of the Department     to certify his/her employment constitutes a misdemeanor. Certifications     are issued by the Department of Civil Service on a biweekly basis     covering new appointments and changes in employees' status. Civil     Service Law also requires that the Civil Service Department examine     the payrolls of all departments, agencies and authorities at     least annually, and authorizes the Department to conduct such     an examination at any time.
