From BASESwiki
The labour rights complaints process in Cambodia distinguishes between individual and collective disputes. For individual disputes, there is a conciliation process through the Ministry of Labour and Vocational Training (MOLVT), followed by the option of taking the case to court if parties do not come to a settlement. Collective disputes are handled by the Arbitration Council—an independent body whose function is to resolve collective labour disputes that could not be resolved by MOLVT conciliation. The Arbitration Council has a tripartite structure comprised of members nominated by unions, employer associations and the MOLVT. The Council currently has 30 members appointed annually by the Minister of Labour.
What kinds of complaints can be handled?
Individual disputes:  complaints can relate to the “interpretation or enforcement of the terms of a labour contract or apprenticeship contract, or the provisions of a collective agreement as well as regulations or laws in effect.”
Collective disputes:  MOLVT is responsible for forwarding non-conciliated disputes to the Arbitration Council which, in turn, evaluates admissibility (i.e., whether the case meets the criteria of collective disputes laid out in the labour law). The Arbitration Council can only hear two types of issues: those specified in the Non-Conciliation Report and those arising from events occurring after the Report that are a direct consequence of the dispute Note: The standards are based on Cambodian Labour Law (1997) or an applicable Collective Bargaining Agreement between employers and workers groups, and as such focus particularly on labour rights. Cambodia has ratified the eight International Labour Organization (ILO) Core Conventions, but Cambodian labour law has not been amended to reflect the subsequent ratifications.
The law has strong provisions with regard to freedom of association, collective bargaining and trade union rights, but it is less robust on child labour and discrimination. Certain working conditions are very detailed (such as leave and dismissals); others are less so (e.g. Occupational Safety and Health).
The Arbitration Council has handled 470 complaints since inception in 2003.
Who can access the mechanism?
Individual case: either party has the right to initiate the process. However, if one of the parties submits a complaint for conciliation, the other party is required to participate.
Note: Any other mechanisms where the dispute is being considered must be halted while the dispute goes through the Arbitration Council process. The law is clear about the order of dispute settlement: conciliation by the MOLVT, followed by arbitration at the Arbitration Council. During the collective dispute resolution process, the parties are not allowed to take any industrial action such as a strike or a lock-out; the Arbitration Council will refuse to hear a case if such action is underway. If a party objects to an Arbitration Council decision in the case of a rights dispute, the parties may seek resolution through the court.  Alternatively, for both rights and interests disputes, the aggrieved party may choose industrial action.
What processes are used?
Mediation/ Conciliation; Arbitration
Conciliation process: the designated Conciliator (from the Labour Inspectorate) will try to help the parties resolve their dispute by agreement. The Labour Inspectorate will set a hearing to take place within 3 weeks of receipt of the complaint. The parties are required to provide information requested by the Conciliator and to attend the meetings called by the Conciliator. Regardless of whether the conciliation is successful, the Conciliator must write and sign a report on the conciliation. Each party also signs the report and receives a certified copy. The report is then submitted to the Minister.
Collective cases
Mediation/ Conciliation; Arbitration
Stage 1: Conciliation: Complainants in a collective dispute (i.e. involving one or more employers and a group of workers) must go first to conciliation through the Labour Ministry, which is mandatory on the parties (see above).
Stage 2: Arbitration: If the conciliation fails, the conciliator submits a Non-Conciliation Report to the Minister of Labour, noting the unresolved issues.  The dispute must then go to an arbitration procedure as set out either in an applicable Collective Bargaining Agreement or in Cambodia’s Labour Law, or to another procedure agreed by the parties.  Disputes that go to arbitration are heard by a three-person panel of the Arbitration Council.
The panel can only examine issues specified in the ‘non-conciliation report’ and issues arising after that report that flow directly from the same dispute. The panel can decide both what are described as “rights issues” (i.e. relating to rights set out in laws, regulations, contracts or collective bargaining agreements) and “interests issues” (i.e. relating to desired future benefits or outcomes not required by law/contracts/agreements etc.).  The panel conducts a hearing, at which the parties may provide documentation and the panel can require the production of relevant documents, call on the assistance of experts, and examine witnesses who the parties can also question.  Documents provided by one party or obtained by the panel must be passed to all parties.  The arbitration panel can at any point move from the hearing back into conciliation mode to help the parties reach their own settlement.
What are the possible outcomes or available resolutions to complaints?
Individual cases
No specified outcomes: it depends on what the parties agree.
If the dispute is settled at the stage of conciliation, the parties sign a written record of the agreement which is certified by the Conciliator and is then binding on the parties, including workers they legally represent.
If conciliation fails, a Non-Conciliation Report is submitted by the conciliator to the Minister of Labour noting the unresolved issues.  The process must then go to arbitration or another procedure agreed by the parties.
Collective cases
If the Arbitration Panel moves into conciliation and agreement is reached, this may be issued as a “consent order” by the Arbitration Council.  Otherwise, the arbitration panel has wide discretion regarding the remedies upon which it can decide.  These may include reinstatement of terminated workers, orders for workers to cease strikes, issuing a collective bargaining agreement, disciplinary procedures and compensation to workers.  The decision must include the panel’s reasoning and must be adopted by consensus or a two-thirds majority.
If a party objects to an award in a rights dispute, they may take the issue to court. If the objection is with regard to an interests-based dispute, the courts have no power to hear it and the parties must seek their own solutions. In both types of dispute, when the process is over, possibilities include non-violent action such as legal strikes and lock-outs.
Can the decision be appealed?
Individual cases
Yes: if the parties cannot reach an agreement through conciliation, either party can file a complaint with the court within two months. The parties can choose to try a different dispute resolution process before they go to court.
Note: if no complaint is filed in the court within two months, the right to sue lapses.
Collective cases
Can outcomes be monitored?
Collective cases
Yes: a monitoring committee, consisting of one representative of Xstrata and representatives of each of the communities in the project’s area, is responsible for reporting on and evaluating the status of claims at each stage of the process.
Can outcomes be enforced?
