2 . Easy for renting out
I would like to buy the house I am currently living in .
It has a very charming atmosphere .
You can do that and live in luxury in my three bedrooms , two bathrooms apartment .
Although , I have some advice , you should consult a doctor or medical professional for help and practique sportes .
You are aware of the fact that our town has been using hydroelectricity for 20 years already .
I have ten years of experience and I believe I am well prepred for the position .
Give a players a total of ten turns each .
When aked what the most disliked English accents was , 55 % people said ` those from the midlands area of the UK ' , followed by 45 % said ` liverpool accents ' .
Thanks for your interest in our products .
Starting with a dramatic increase to two million in 2004 and a sligth increase till the midth of the following year , there was a sharp decrease to about one million .
i am not a socialist or a capitalist , i concern every tiny things happening everyday and evereynight around you .
I look like my father .
I moved to Sao Paulo in 1982 and I graduate in 1983 .
This is not only a privilege for me , but also a huge responsibility .
Hope to hear from you soon Eva .
At  next photo  Chan and Sara .
One day the butler discovers the dead body of Montgomery on  floor of the workroom , next to the body lies a bloody jewel-encrusted dagger , the murder weapon .
I was looking in the Online-shop .
Somtimes i go biking or meet friends in the city .
In the photo in the middle is me .
Sample size are 5000 people in the UK .
I am writing to you to express my point of view about Super-Mart .
It 's an outdoor job with the most amazing animals in the world !
The objects in the painting is fragmented , as if seen from multiple viewpoints .
The apartment has  bathroom with jacuzziand all of them are almost fully equipped .
 children vanished , in the wrong wellingtons , on foggy afternoons , andothers had to hobble home in those that were left .
There is a market on Julio Avenue too .
I know very well how difficult it was to achieve such a great result .
My son is called Nik , he is wearing a blue or brown T-shirt and a blue or black short .
I go to bed at 11 o'clock , at night .
Give ten turns to each player .
Do you want to go with me on Tuesday  dinner time ?
It should be suitable not only for  holiday home but also for a good investment property .
We will have chicken sandwiches , water and winea party is reserved for 30 guests .
We should meet at 11am .
So we should believe this investigation .
Now I am working in a factory as a manager , I believe I have potential energy to fufill the new task .
I though it was Mykonos so that I took off the ferry when it had stopped .
I will persuade our local coffe shop manager to create special prices and promotions for different kind of students profile .
Finally , the team selected 3 of the slogans .
I do n't need a career plan , because I 'm  pensioner .
As  result of market research , we feel that we 're in the necessary step .
There are many department stores and markets .
Why do you think you have been replaced ?
I was born on November 11,1978 in a village , where I spend most of my childhood .
The employees are really happy with all  necessary equipment to do their job , they understand what their aims and objectives are .
Spring , this seasom  more beautiful .
You 'll be able to feed them by yourself .
I think you should buy these .
It 's very an exciting city .
I am thirty-seven years old .
Looking at the article again , I have to say that the devil is not so black as it is painted - if the author succeeds in making at least one person happy , I 'm ready to take my words back .
We learn environment , flora and fauna .
Please find enclosed a budget outline -- it includes my income , expenses and savings per month .
The airport is too big , it 's crowded , there is many strange people here , I have to say  you I 'm lost .
Hi , Dillion  Thank you for your email about my birthday .
But I think that love for children and knowledge would be quite enough to succeed in your work .
My name 's Luxanna  I 'm form Hubei .
If all the bottles are knocked down , then the player takes two more shots and all the points are added together .
I life in a flat with 5 people , sometimes i like it and sometimes it 's too much for me .
A wonderful house in Kioni , Ithaca .
sorry it was a joke .
I have lunch at 1 o'clock .
I have no job in the moment .
I find this course a really practical course , where he 'll learn to analyse his current use of time and recognise his key accountabilities and value-adding tasks .
There is a window with cirtearn there .
I 'm decorating my living room , talking on the fone , and cooking for dinner .
Thank you for your time , Sincerely yours , Ramziya .
For example , to start to be engaged in fitness .
Sue is wearing in  brown sweater and jeans .
I 'd lead the student council to raise fund which can finance the out-of-town activities to enrich our school life .
I was born in 1950 .
I think you should buy the orange summer skirt , the skirt is nice .
The most important thing is how to deal with it .
Are you good at cooking ?
I 'll admit that , for once , I believe the British should make a new adaptation which would be hilarious .
If you find  strange why I do n't work on Monday ?
This stunning apartment is located in the prime Pacific Heights area .
I worked as I travelled .
Let 's meet each other after this time or come to visit me .
She decided to spend much time with her daughter .
First of all , I must spend four years finishing my university life .
I 'm 29 years old on Saturday , December 4rd , and I 'm having a party .
I was sure you had known about it .
As she approached the corner at Elm and Forth , she saw a young couple got out of a car .
I live in Wenzhou with my wife and daughter .
It was then that she seized the knife and stabbed him .
I also watch movies - extremelly funny movie .
At 5pm I feed my dog again .
He just met a client whom felt unpleasant caused by career path confusion .
To sum up , I want to throw a lot of bricks at her , in order to protect the young people .
My wife is going to cook a secret family recipe  Lasagna .
Brochure -- European Collection 1 .
I like cooking with my friend but i do n't like playing chess .
He 's either a bit stubborn or impatient .
I 'm very reliable and organized and hard-working  I 'm very outgoing and ambitious .
Another thing that i will have to do , will be collect some information about the company , for example what kind of proffesional that they prefer to employ .
I look forward to the start of classes .
I should just do it and never give up .
Companies would be able to safe a lot of money because there would be no need for them to buy expensive equipment and to rent large offices .
But I never go to business trips .
For someone that 's called Hiro it have to be this way for sure .
Checking informations referent demographic groups is possible to notice that the men grupo there are a large allowance of age then the women one .
Why spend a lot of money in expensive restaurants ?
Our Bank is the first bank in our country .
My grandmother lives in Volgograd , Russia with my father , my mother and my brother .
Male employees can wear suits and light shirts .
If someone is looking for a good translator and market options are not satisfactory , it is better to wait one more week !
Developing individual fitness program is a passion for me .
In spring  more sunny and cool .
then turn left at Green Ave.
Good morning  Mr Petrov , The office in our has twelve desks , fourteen chairs and one table .
Furthermore , you can study the complementary colors and oft , small strips which given a quiet mood of the water .
There is  big window with curtains in the livingroom .
You will be working with crocodiles , it is so exhilarating !
If you vote me in the presidents office I promise that , for once , your voice will be heard .
It has curved edges , bright colours ,  very comfortable pillows  to have a good rest .
I hope you can understand that I could n't miss this opportunity to have a family gathering only once a year , as our family members all live in different places .
I sometimes work a long hours .
I could be over at your house within half an hour if you feel the urge to speak to somebody in person .
then , line up the the bottles which  filled with a little waterin rows of 4 , then 3 , then 2 , then 1 .
My favourite band is Linkin Park .
I sometimes must to check the work .
And you will be able to do daily and simple activities that previously you would n't  because of an irrational fear .
Hope Gavin 's movie be succesful and they will never break up .
It It have n't against indications .
I urge you to apply for this job .
A thousands of people like you are running around .
What steps would you take to succeed in a victimization case ?
I 'm live in Manaus , Brazil .
Further more I will build up a better cooperation with the head teacher  which will ensure a better relation between those who make decisions and us students who are mainly affected by them .
They lived together 20 yeas .
She also does the gardening in the morning and sets the table every day at 6pm .
I did n't receive this money in half  month .
Avoid giving anything purple or black as these are mourning colours .
Please , come and make a difference .
I ` m a PR consultant -LRB- public relations -RRB- .
You who are tired of taking pharmaceutical remedies , we have the ideal solution for you .
You know that Modern life is impossible without travelling .
my love an sunday , my  sunday get up at elven a clock , my play computer games at two clock in the night , oh , my love an sunday .
You must clean the house in  morning everyday , because I like my house cleanly .
I live in Rio de Janeiro .
I startet elementary school in 1956 when I was seven years old and I started playing the violin when I was 7 years old .
Then Suyumbike climbed the tower to the seventh story floor and jumped out of the window .
The wall colour is light green .
Also you will travel regularly to amazing places around the country to observe wild crocodiles .
My favorite day is sunday .
Unfortunately I do n't know the English language well to communicate with local citizens easily .
I 'm writing from the resturant in Florida .
The fourth stage of my plan is not clear right now .
Would you like to wake up to cool , fresh sea air , in  Pacific Heights setting ?
I 'm sure this is by far the most exhilarating job for you .
I hope you can come .
Do you have a sore throat , take a spoonful of honey and ginger every hour .
I like of my life and of my work .
I highly appreciate your coming to listen  my campaign speech for student council president .
I had never asked about my dreams to anybody , but I 'm a dreamer guy .
Did you find it discriminatory for a sex gender ?
He experimented boldly with color to express the primitive energy of animals .
It 's really a serious problem because each project must be finished by a team , not only you .
I also have this problem - I am afraid of confined spaces , especially if they are crowded with people .
I ` ver found an absolutely amazing job for you .
It shimmers in all colors of the rainbow .
It 's very simple and cheap !
They live in Rio de Janeiro .
The wife has long , straight and black hair .
The lyrics are also very impressive and reflects our mind .
He is big and small and has short black hair and brown eyes .
I went to Kazan University when I was 16 .
I would like to introduce you  a renewable energy source -- the solar power !
I do n't like soccer , but I can swim .
In opposite our house there is the swimming pool .
What do I wish to do ?
I really do n't think you had a good idea .
Also , compared with the second website , the first one offers the customers diversified ways to pay and deliver products , which is really convenient and appealing .
I feed the dog at 8 A.M every day .
They may wear a blue skirt and white blouse .
After a few seconds , it liked a lifetime to Meg , the young woman grabbed Meg 's laptop and ran off .
For those of you that do n't know me , my name is sophia , the Vice G.M.
I decided to run for this position , and I believe that I am the most prepared to conduct this council toward the changes our school demands .
Barely half of the people would change their voice if they could , because of not being satisfied with their accent .
I went back to home .
The apartment  located on  13th floor of Pacific Heights with  beautiful panorama .
Does not matter if this companionshipe is a husband , a boyfriend or simply a friend .
I think in 5 years through my work hard I will make more money .
When he was on his way to work with coffee and  laptop in his hands , he saw a young couple get out  a car and start to vandalize the local newsagents .
I guess you 've just won a new regular guest !
All depends on a standard of living , from that as the state cares of the people , life actually at people the heavy  And Bryansk is a separate conversation .
Cubism prepared the way to abstract arts .
Our notebooks have a 1 year , our pens 2 weeks warranty .
It 's an oil painting done in 1874 .
Do not hesitate , rent your own new apartment .
Company will try to promote the situation , and you 'd better make much more communication with freind , these all will help you  Yonr sincerely .
In the evening we dance or stay on the deck when the weather is fine .
As you all know it is a hard job which requires a hard working , trustworthy president .
Firstly , this job is totally different from the traditional ones that you have no intention to  .
First , there was a poor man named John .
she does n't like phones , earrings and dresses .
Additionally , she got an overview about multiple perceptual positions .
Walking into the apartment along with the porch will make you feel returning to the nature , and you can leave the burdens of work outside of the door .
43 % agreed on changing their accent if it were possible and the most preferred accent was Standard English with 60 % .
My favorite day is Saturday .
I would start saying I count on you to this new jorney .
The modern kitchen has many cabinets for storage .
Miniskirts and sweatshirt are not a good idea .
I 'm very glad to take your letter .
I regret that we will not be able to enjoy your company and hope your party is a success .
You should control your children .
My mother Traute lives in my house , she is very ill and eighty-nine !!!
But he lives anymore with us .
I finish my doctorate and MBA .
You should mention the circumstances ' leading up to that treatment and , If possible , give the date , place and approximate time it happened .
Perhaps  because I have won almost all  matches .
Those coffee drinks are too expensive and they are full of sugar .
Were n't such kind of stories with you .
He struggles trough his life untill he meets the right women , settles down and establishes a successful business .
The winner is , the player with the most points .
At the same time , her boyfriend took an huge cake appearing in front of her .
I will encourage the principles to locate more low cost caffee shops and stationary shops .
First of all , the work will be outdoors , as you want to , and you will be in contact with different kinds of animals .
The detective found him lying on the floor near the window .
I study math , physic and topograph .
Rio de Janeiro in winter is sometimes cool and cloudy , but never snowy .
Thank you for your attention .
To conclude , the trend of national sales is more steady than the international one .
My daughter is tall , with blonde hair and big , blue eyes .
I can speak German , English and French .
There is  confortable , large bed .
Water the flowers in the afternoon .
And the captain was unfriendly and unprofessional .
An area is marked as the bowling alley .
Tomorrow the weather will be better than today , so I  going to know to the beach .
It can help  any kind of nausea .
I hope this help you .
We watch TV at 8 o'clock in the evening .
I did the ironing on Monday .
Another option is this luxurious property in the capital of Ithaca .
The total delay was about 2 hours .
At 7 o'clock I go to work .
I can dance but I ca n't sing .
And he finally told her what was hid deeply at the bottom of his heart , but he never asked her to be her girlfriend and she never gave him the answer .
You 'll have a full accident insurance , 1 month holiday every year and regular trips to Florida to observe wild crocodiles .
When asked if did they change their voice depending on whom they were talking to , 81 % said yes , especially to ensure they were understood or to fit in better .
I surf the internet every evening .
I have long , red hair and big green eyes .
The main course was too salty and the red wine sour .
And I love playing computer games every day at 6pm .
I 'd like to visit all the museums and I 'd like to watch at least one a play on Broadway .
It is suitable for the Blinghts in both requests as holiday residence and investiment , because they can rent it out legally .
Hi , Jane  Thanks for your help .
I hope you can come !
My professional is demand to one teach in the idiom english .
I 'm both reliable and a bit lazy .
Nedless to say that they left the club together and they are inseparable for three years now .
My father is seventy-six and my mother is sixty-seven .
The whole electricity and the water lines are modern .
Line up the bottles in row  4 , then 3 , then 2 and then 1 on the area about 8 metters x 3 metters .
I should have foreseen that difference of cultures could cause some misundestandings .
I 've found an absolutely amazing job for you :  zookeeper at Flossington Zoo .
I think your girlfriend wo n't like you to be a hardened criminal .
There is no other environmentally-friendly method as this one .
Nowadays everyone is interested in environment .
In my opinion talk shows and game shows are a load of rubbish .
The bottles are lined up in rows of 4 , then 3 , then 2 , then 1 - just like ten-pin bowling .
She had an anxiety attack - unable to breath and feeling faint .
Here is a summary of  findings from the survey .
Of couse we need lots of sun light , then high quality solar panels , large surfaces to install solar panels and ... a lot of money for installation . .
Do it at the evening , too .
Line up the bottles in rows like ten-pin bowling .
Fill  with a little water to make then heavier .
For me , it is absolutely necessary and will be the first item I 'll work  as soon as  elected by you .
But I need mettings to make my job .
On Sunday , he goes to  park at eleven o'clock , and plays tennis at half past eleven .
And that is also not carried out .
Now we are have  vacation and he wearing blue shorts and  white T-shirt .
The name of our company is John Tiles Ltd. and we are working in the manufacturing industry and we have a open Manager position in Manchester .
I want to know more about Project Management .
An e-ticket should be printed from home from your computer to prove you bought a ticket .
In my opinion I 'm in perfect shape what give me a excellent level of fitness .
I recommend you to prepare some food for  lunch break at home in the morning before you leave your home , such as sandwiches , vegetables and fruits .
There is a big bed , a closet and a chair in my bedroom .
it has  rustic proch and  original wood staircase , besides , it also is trim throughout the house .
Line up the bottles in rows , just like ten-pin bowling .
Should we put in place informal weekly meetings ?
I will convince the Principle to ban any homework .
I can drive and sing .
Secondly , a leader should always have an eye set on the future because as a manager you have to see the big picture .
Sometimes  is boring and tiring but I like it !
I have five plants in my livingroom .
I would also not be dependent to a landlord .
On Saturday I sweeped the floor , moped the floor , I washed the dishes and made the beds .
and then  take them for a walk at 9pm .
we are the same age .
So  ca n't be a choice for the Blight 's family .
Sean play basketball every afternoon .
Maybe they just do n't notice the large amount of your work , because you do n't complain , and keep giving you various tasks .
Its allowed to take two shots on each turn .
For those of you that do n't know me , my name 's Tom Smith .
If I am be offered to this position I believe I will be  remarkable asset to your fitness club .
How do you identify direct and indirect discrimination ?
bccky likes chicken cheese .
Super-Mart 's strategy is to price their goods under wholesale .
We want that you should well-dressed wear , like suit ´ s with cotton and tie .
I need to take my umbrella , my raincoat , my flashlight , my clothes and my sleeping bag .
I 've found an absolutely amazing job for you .
the weather today is wet , but do n't worry  I  going to visit  museum and after  I eat in a big restaurant .
I 'm writing regarding an issue of breach of contract .
I think they can make you be more professional .
You are the best in your class !
We eat out or got to the cinema .
Are you free for lunch at Wednesday ?
After a short time , his dog turned round and ran away from his master .
I 'm driving there on Thursday early morning and will arrive  about 8 pm evening .
I felt like the plane was dropping .
Think it over and try to overcome all things .
General feeling is that no recognition of the diversity of styles and tastes in different parts of the world has been shown .
I think there are some different base on genders .
When are you going to have supper ?
Today the weather are wet and rainy , but I heard  on the radio the weather from  next day , it 's going to  warm and sunny tomorow .
Tim Your story is very exciting !
Mary and Simon are bringing water and wine .
Tomorrow 's election is of great importance to the future of our school .
And even if he did what they say , who cares ?
Now please continue to believe in my capability of creating  new school life for you .
Which are the differences between a male and a female worker ?
As for the preference , the majority of both groups likes magazines rather than blogs though the male have special interests in extensive websites contents .
Possessions and property play an especially important role , and he explains it when he says  men  when they enter into society  give up liberty of a kind .
It also has a currency converter , so forget about asking the prices for ever .
When the two groups are compared , both have their strengths and weaknesses .
Also I dream about travel around the world .
The ship was not new , it was not a cruise ship .
On the other hand , the men 's market is still growing , with only three competitors appearing in the next three to five years .
Today I 'm very tired and I have no time to take a rest .
As you can see in my budget outline enclosed , I have an adequate income to pay off the loan .
I browsed the link , I think you should buy the purple top , you look like very young .
We need  as much words as possible to achieve native speaker fluency .
although the commutativity is less effective compared to the other group .
Perhaps in another moment of our lives  .
I think you should buy a blue sweatshirt .
Do you remember you said that dating was unnatural , but we agreed to go out together .
This particular image is a great example of beauty , progress , but also has a classic hint with stylish glamour .
I would like to stress that our local community strongly opposes the opening of Super-Mart in our town .
I can speak Russian , English and German .
we could fill them with somewater to make the bottle heavier .
Think about taking your neighbour 's dog with you .
By the way , when u at leisure .
I was shaked by a huge push and fell down .
The whole lounge was noisy , someone was talking about the strike , someone was anxious to ask for changing the airline .
I believe I will be a remarkable asset to your center .
My daughter 's name is Maria .
However this is really hard , because you do n't want to miss important actions .
Better schedule controling helps us feel easier and avoid unnecessarily thrusting your mind in haste .
My family have three peoples .
What is your size of clothes ?
Firstly , a person with a doctor degree has a legal claim to be addressed as doctor .
My deadline for the goal is next April .
I love my job because I help the people and I always take brakes .
Once the week he watches movies on Saturday at 5pm .
My name is Milyausha Sungatullina .
We 'll eat and drink spagetti , lozannie , ice-cream , red wine , apple and orange coke .
I work as a teacher .
I want to improve my english for my job and holiday .
Gwenneth Paltrow and Jeff Bridges excel in their roles and the supporting cast does a fine job too .
A terrifying plunder happen in downtown this morning .
This bright contemporary home with three bedrooms , two bathrooms and a full finished day light basement is surrounded by woods providing lots of privacy .
If you have chance  take documents and drinking water .
The red hat is nice to .
The balls are thrown until one of each type of balls has gone into the bin .
William goes to school every morning .
My wife graduated  Economy Universaty .
And Granny can walk the dog every afternoon expect  the Tuesday .
Look at the file attached .
So we have some small problems when we meet , but we always come to an agreement on food to please everyone .
I was  Graphic Design but I only study here at  moment .
There are five people in my family .
I myarried my husband Slava in 1987 .
We are looking for all kind of volunteers .
Work outside with some of the most amazing animals in the world  it 's absolutely for you .
We appreciate your interest in our technical university in Colonia .
Tina is a very nice and lovely person .
After four years studing in the college , I done a master course of economics and in the same time I started to work in a consultancy company .
Just launched on the market today , people are going  crazy to get one that most Chinese stores have already sold  out .
I 'm talking about a fabulous , a majestic and vintage TV from last century  straight to your home .
I was in a museum and I eat in a great restaurant .
But we are able to make changes , since we are living under a good supervision .
Anyway , despite all this confusion , he finally lucked out and was found unharmed .
At the night , i usually go out to have fun with my girlfriend .
You should stay at home more time , spend time with your family , because they 'll help you .
I 'd like to travel to New York next year  as a short term goal .
Please find enclosed a budget outline including my income , expenses and saving per month .
I may have found an absolutely amazing job for you .
The Place where I work is good .
There are many things near my house .
Hello  Teacher  my name is Werner .
Thanks a lotand I see you later .
It features  original wood staircase and trim throught  house .
The monkeys love to play ,; they are fun and confused .
In São paulo , Brazil , summer starts in december , summer is sunny and very hot .
I send a answer yet , but I do n't know what happened   do n't appear here ,; so I send this just to pass me to the next level .
I usually mop the floor on wednesdays and I walk dogs every morning .
A light gray dress  35 dollars .
If I can just sum up the main points , we should pick the second one and I am quite confident it will be the beginning of our further success .
to those of you who do n't already know me , I am Björn Scheiner and I want to become the new president for the student council .
You can put a hot mixture of vinegar , olive oil , and eucalyptus on aches and pains .
I have breafast at nigh o'colck .
I love you friend , Lele .
I take the trash out on tuesday at night , and clean the house and sweep the floor 2 times a week .
She is wearing his favorite red dress .
I hope such a english online cours can help me to prove my skills in my free time .
I prefer to avoid sitcoms at all .
Do n't miss the one-time opportunity to see your favorite players in person .
The apartment rent for $ 1,850 per month .
Now I am a teacher and a housewife .
I will be very grateful to you if you give me such an opportunity .
I would like to cook on Saturday .
Have you   taking time off for pregnancy or maternity leave  ever been demoted when you return to work ?
A wide inquiry area has been covered , in both of the markets , to collect the different impressions of different types .
I check the water from the birds on Tuesday and Thursday .
I invite you to a party .
In the morning we eat coffee , milk , bread , chocolate , juice and other .
That is my family and I love all of them .
In 30 minutes they come to home .
I 'd like to start our präsentation with a little quiz .
He is in the park .
My needs and goals are quite understandable and realistic .
He was a powerfull man with a powerfull private army .
Brown belt per $ 29.00 dollar .
Bryant is one of my best colleagues in my department .
I studied the flute from 1984 to 1993 but now I do n't play the flute .
The third property is newly built apartments in Vathi .
A woman is not encouraged to meet clients or invited to social events to meet them .
That 's a good start and I 'm confident you can get it over .
I live in Goiânia City .
John is going to tell Isabella about that .
At night , the old town is very nice .
If you pay attention the image shows a glamorous person dressed with classic clothes , what give her a stylish appearance , consequently it fits with  Century .
I think they are falling deeply  love , they face the reality  life and deal with these obstruct and difficult .
Everyone in my family is my best friend .
After I married I wanted to travel with my wife .
Always a good suggestion is to take garlic .
My name 's Kelly , and I 'm 26 years old .
Congradulations on yourgraduating from university , and winning the reward !
There are three bedrooms , two bathrooms and a kitchen .
I can dance and sing , but I ca n't play an instrument .
I 'm eating the cake and watching tv .
If you would like to discuss this with me .
I would like to buy me a horse , so I could go for a ride everyday .
Then he offered to come to his flat to sleep there , ´ cause it wasn ´ t so far away .
When the denunciations became more expressive ?
I think I am the perfect candidate for this position .
If you hear the allarm you have to get out of your hotel .
Meg was rooted to the spot by fear .
I love my carrer and my dream is teach in  brazil univesity .
You should have the coffee break at home .
I would like you to come to my house in No. 5 Yellow Street at 1pm .
Besides , if you live in a hustle-and-bustle style and also want to help , perhaps you can consider offering financial assistance and meanwhile provide some vacations for the jobless to go back on their track .
My parets live near Tyumen .
I can speak Chinese and  little English .
Afther that journey , I really have been feelling myself already to UN .
I must tell you something about Canada cultures befor you come .
How about the beige sweater ?
Furthermore , it is estimated that  demographic size of group 1 will increase  over 6 million while in group 2 it will decrease  5 million .
They have been found  inside Earth 's orbit to beyond Saturn 's orbit .
There should be specific ways in which children could use the cards .
In case  non-observance , you will suffer a just punishment .
I did n't married and i have n't any Child .
You described it so well last time .
I can play basketball , pingpang ball , and tennis , but I ca n't play golf .
I will speak to you later on the cellphone .
He wear a blue jacket .
I will get some drinks and food .
There are many opportunities for I  improve my job prospect and have a good time in these five years .
You ought  make tea with raspberry leaf and ginger .
I ´ ve been studying your necessities and looking for an adequate property .
When you hear a emergency alarm , you have to go to exit to the starway .
I hope we can still be friends .
I like to study English here .
They could deliver the service online through a Website that allows everybody to browse their inventory , add what they want to a shopping cart and check out using a secure server .
Each player is given a frisbee and is allowed to take two shots on each turn .
But sometimes he is not good at listening to other people 's ideas , he become a little bit aggressive .
First the airline overbooked that day  then the departure was late ,  I had to wait for two and  half hour .
Monkeys are smaller than lions .
The beige sweater and that white pants are expensive .
The cabin was dirty and full of ants .
I live in Rio Brilhante .
Do n't worry about grammar as you can put down your ideas as bullet points , or as numerical points .
Fill them with water to make them heavier .
There are twelve desks , fourteen chairs and thirteen computers .
I 'm a accountant in Shanghai jing-xi electronics imformation system co. , ltd. .
As you can see on my CV , I have a long experience as a personal trainner in so respectable gyms .
I think the home environment and many other things can be the sources of stress .
I am 23 years old .
We very often have been in wood and spend our time there .
I like playing badminton because it 's fun and exciting .
There are some websites to help you to keep your information secure and limit who can see your pages .
I think the beige sweater is expensive .
Which of the following are fixed in the recruitment policy ?
It 's a social critical song , describing the negative effects of rebuilding .
Hi , my name 's Yalina , i am from JiangXi , China .
The Zoo provides full accident insurance , 1 month holiday evey year ,  regualr trips to Florida to observe wild crocodies .
For group 2 , there are only 3 competitive products .
Our Grandma does the laundry on tuesday afternoon and she does gardening in the morning .
To help me with vocabulary , I note down all the words that I can not recognize in my notebook , which enclosed with a sentence for reference .
Specialists in counseling are welcomed to solace victims who have lost their family members .
I think , if you have a big love , you  really happinest ...
I finally ger an offer as an secretary in a company .
My name 's Peter and I 'm 43 years old .
I have two years of Student Council experience , when I was able to meet a lot of students and listen to their needs .
I have a big family , there are six people in my family .
A divorce would be too expensive for him .
I go to bed at twelve o'clock .
That is what you want .
All employees should follow this dress code .
I live in Moscow , Russia .
First , you must learn to collaborate with your colleagues , for example ,  update the dadabase frequently .
If you wear a dress it might be coloufull .
I ca n't swim , sometimes I like  take a talkwalk .
If you would like to work like to volunteer , please call to number 8000 .
At night i go to bed .
In order to decide our strategy for the coming decade we need to take into consideration the results of the survey carried out recently .
Dose the laundry on Friday .
I really miss you and the days we spent together .
It is with greate pleasure that we at Blue Sky can inform our shareholders and clients of a change to the company 's logo .
Last year my friend and me travelled to Antalya in Turkey .
It must be by far the  exhilarating experience to abserve corcodiles !
There are five new chaies and there is a white table in the dining room .
To my mind , if the website is easy to use and reliable , the customers will make purchases .
Before each program , I had checked  blood pressure , heart rate and lung capacity for each individual and made a suitable program .
Like  many of the other animals , we already have  copyright .
And I will study more and practice more .
If that way ca n't help you , I suggest that you donate your part of money until you do n't have any enough money to go shopping .
I 'm also certificated in Cardio kickboxing .
you go througt the restaurant ,  then turn left , you must can find my house soon .
The party starts at 7 o'clock .
I never do the laundry and mop de floor .
This cottage has  wonderful view just waiting to be enjoyed .
I dont ' like  play badminton and football for my birthday .
Not only do I have a big knowledge about the topic  fitness and nutrition , but also about how to motivate people to make them reaching aims they would n't reach by theirself .
Let 's start with our city , changing our sources of energy .
I often have meetings ar go on business trips .
Go straight ahed  Liverpool Road and turn left .
I 've also I organized a petition in order to modify our school dress code allowing all students to use headwear .
Because to whome could i talk english in germany ?
I urge you to send your application because I 'm convinced that it is by far the most exhilarating job you can get .
Anyway , thank you ever so much .
Discrimination can be direct , indirect , deliberate or accidental .
We have already travel agents in Spain and in Germany .
But the young woman was catched at the hair by a passer-by .
The captain was unfriendly and unprofessional .
I have long legs and small feet .
I do n't want another job .
Perhaps , he had a bad day .
I usually after work watched TV ,  about 3 hours a day .
Let me tell you why you should apply  this position .
The law applies equaly to both men and women .
Furthermore I play all other kind of music -- Irish folk , waltz and even rock  you can play on accordion .
My mother  brining chicken and sandwiches .
I 'm a teacher and a work in a public school .
Secondly , at lunch time , a vegetable sandwich is both healthy and cheap .
Next to the window is a small table with two chairs .
Some complaints about your behavior and your management style of colleagues .
You can still go to the restaurant maybe once a month .
We like playing tennis and voleyball .
I strongly encourage you to appy for this job asap .
In my family are four people .
Now I , m having a problem .
Counseling -- volunteers are needed to talk to the victims as their process this natural disaster .
I also put away ? 7,000 per month into  saving account with high interest , and leave about ? 3,000 in my checking account for emergency per month .
Thank you for your interest in our university .
The secound Game is the Domino  with  regular Deck .
I go to bed at 12 o'clock .
Before I sleep at night , I try to visualize  pleasant and restful place .
Hit it over the net , so the other team have to try to stop it touching the ground .
However the kitchen is a very large room with a big window which  made from granite counters .
I 'm twenty-nine years   I have long blond hair and brown eyes .
I put a temporary workers and assign the cash register .
It happens because  many things  specially our beaches and nature beauty .
There 's  table opposite the sofa .
I wish you a window seat , because when the plane  flying or landing , you 'll have a wonderfull view .
My doughter name is Marina .
I think there 's definitely a conspiracy .
Stay in door the peek an it 's going to be the very wed. .
Can you definite what the three grounds of unlawful harassment are ?
Our second game is catching me up , someone runs an over all , and whom he catches first  transmitted to the turn to overtake the others .
Thank you for your time .
I also ask you to consider the poorer students .
I promise you a better place to live in , study in and love in .
The discrimanation can be indirect .
When they arrested him , he was running to home in the street .
So , if I 'm wrong in any of them , please let me know .
In the end she is telling this story for a entire group who is trying to found the sunken ship .
The remodeled modern kitchen offers you the full set of appliances in high quality and brings you the best convenience of the modern technology .
Also I will knit , sew and ski .
Then we can witness a dramatical downturn by almost 1 m. till the end of 2005 .
I will organize some extra-curricular activities .
So popular is online shopping now , that a lot of real bookstores and some other stores are closing down !
He play tennis at half past 11 .
We are located in Manchester .
Spend 3-5 minutes exploring each of the ` sides ' .
You can bring them to the back entrance and leave them in the kitchen .
It is a potential large group .
Instead , we would like to invite you and Lucy to come round for dinner Wednesday or Friday next week .
The player with most points wins .
I can practice with you .
I have already met my lawyer and I 'm within my rights to object to being refused the overtime pay .
It has enough bright bedrooms , excellent fittings and you can still select your own fittings of your choice .
Our canteen will offer students meals for free with the fund we will raise with our schools events .
Dogs or cats are negotiable .
There are two new brown closet and two white chair .
My older brother is almost forty and my littler brother is twenty-six .
Although the steak was a little raw , but anyway the steak had a juicy flavour .
I go to the park and meet friends .
There is a big window in the living room , under the window there is a sofa , the sofa is so beautiful , opposite the sofa there is a TV on the walls .
Female monkeys is over love  own baby and always hold the baby in her body .
It 's about 86 degrees Fahrenheit .
I came to the conclusion that the only reason why you want to quit your job is your illness .
Meg was surprised when suddently they started to break the windown with a hammer , and throwing  paint on the store front .
Thank you for the nice phone call and your interest in our product .
What an coincidence , when the national sales reached its peak at almost 3m , the international sales suffered from its lowest as nearly half 1m .
I do n't feel I can always count on her , because she is a bit unreliable .
I can play the guitar and the drums .
Is it possible to get a free day ?
The ship was not new and the ship was not  cruise ship .
All these elaborated points were taken into consideration with the result that the situation relaxed .
They were breaking the windows with a hammer and throwing paint on the store front .
It showed that most people in our country have more than 2 TV-sets .
I 'll think about change my career .
my name 's Nicole  i am forty years old .
I work in a store .
Please find enclose a budget outline including my income and expenses .
Then I saw the broken lock on the door .
So , how exhilarating this job is !
Recently one of my friends Meg came across with e terrible situation .
Take the frisbee and shoot .
I believe we should make the school a better learning environment and therefore I want to paint the walls with you , create another social meeting room and reduce homework .
If you follow this advices , you 'll be more professional .
He very  likes reading newspaper , he reading newspaper every morning .
I did n't like this part .
I do n't know yet what course I will choose .
So what kinds of project are you suffering from .
There are 13 computers and 16 keyboards in the office .
I 'm sure that you -LRB- because of your profile -RRB- will find absolutly amazing this experience .
Before you vote , I 'd like to give you some information about myself that will convince you to vote for me .
It was recomended  me by my close friend .
Sometimes I try to name the subjects in English .
Often I drive with the car to companies .
I am so happy , that I 've split up with Jo , my ex boyfriend , last week !
After an earthquake happens , a tsunami can strick .
You are kidding the heart  this company .
This is a picture from my daughter and me .
I like playing football and basketball .
each child can try to knocked a bottle two times .
What foods do you like eating ?
I studed English at school 15 years ago , but it was very difficult .
And finally we will have to face 1 long-term and 2 recent competitive products .
My wife is wearing a white and pink pants and  white shirt .
The rent is only $ 1850 per month .
It is not a seafront building , but it is located close to the beaches .
On the one hand , many students or young people will leave our town because there wo n't be any suitable jobs .
They landed out of the runway , the landing gear of them broke and one stopped far away from the other .
For the future of our school , vote Julia Smith for President .
In the afternoon I meet friends .
The Asia ´ s representative discussed about making a robot that  make a few facial expressions .
so I wander  I can teach in  college in the future .
You should concentrate on finishing school so that you can get a job .
She currently does orderly duties in hospitals even though she 's only two foot tall .
After lunch began the most interesting  - we went to the turtles island , where we swam with a big turtles !
Last week I was in that shop in Eden Road .
Another thing  I would like to work one year in this job .
Where do you have to go to get help ?
But I ca n't play basketball .
Finally a good leader learn and grow in hard experiences work .
Jiangyanrong was 19 years old when she met her teacher , Kangnan .
I urge you to consider it , because  is by far the job that better suits you .
The window was broken by a hammer and the store front was painted .
I 'm working in a hotel .
He 's not the fastest one at our office , but his contributions to our workgroup are quite useful .
But , anyway , I think you are a nice person , and I 'm sure you 'll find your ideal partner in the future .
My goal are a lot .
Ladies and Gentlemen , welcome to attend my campain for student coucil president .
He lives and works in Santa Catarina .
It starts at 10 o'clock .
on Monday I did the ironing .
I am making chicken sandwiches .
In my job i also study have a seminar .
How would you characterize sexual harassment ?
We 're making the reservation at a restaurant in NO. 5 Yellow Street .
Sometimes nostalgic songs like this are able to blow our mind away , so that we can think about the past and the future .
I am from Germany and live in Berlin .
Husband Gets up  8 ` clock every day .
the most people have two TV 's , like me .
Do you need some of these clothes ?
From cheap items to world famouse brand all of what u want u will will find.
For about 6 years I 'm vice president in the youth group of a political party and team captain of the successful soccer school team .
How many people are in your family ?
3 - One point is scored for each pin that is knocked down .
I think that shorter classes  terms , more coffe breaks and holidays , all of them are important , but balance is necessary .
The job of Student Council President is a serious one .
In this movement everything is reduced to geometrical forms , objects are shown fragmented .
After doing this kind of activity , it 's easier to find a better job .
He showed himself as a skillful researcher able to get information in very uneasy conditions .
I did the ironing and washed the dishes in Mondey .
Hello  friends  Will prepare their favorite dishes like : From Pete : chicken , rice and vegetables . From Jon : chiken , vegetables and ice cream .
However , we should consider to increase our web-related content to this group .
It 's great to know that you will come to visit our company next month .
Actually , I think it is no so difficult to overcome as you think .
I am currently participating in 3 full-time extracurricular activities and I hold  leadership position in one of them .
He is father 's my mother .
 March 28rd , and I ` mhaving a party .
I like going to the movies and talking online .
There 's a museum in the city .
They are developed to order under the individual project taking into account architectural features of a premise .
Capturing is not mandatory in most official rules , though many people play with variant rules that make capturing to be mandatory .
I think it 's more challenges .
One point is scored for each pin that is knocked down .
That must be the meaning of the life .
Hey  Dillon  Thank you for your letter !
I do n't have many times with you .
I hope you can improve the speed of serving food .
Please let me know where and when I will be trained , I will wait for your answer .
I can speak Armenian and Russian .
Nothing material will change , players ,  coach and opponents will all be the same , but his faith and his motivation will get changed and will change his team history .
This night we have a dinner in my house .
My Home  next to  restaurant , opposite to the park .
The monkeys are so cute .
I veri badli speak English .
You 'd enjoy the short distance to  office and convenience in going out for a drink or visiting theaters and museums .
Usually , I go home late and I 'm so tired so that no way to care  my daughter .
It wsa the first unusual experiense walking to the forest .
I would prefer the second image for the ad .
It 's better value for  future , you ca n't  given the fact that it 's the best bang for your buck .
I want to try my best  learn to English .
I am the youngest daughter in the familiy .
Have just passed the MBA .
You see , you don ´ t have to resign !
As to  dealines , I set to get a university degree in three years time .
I 'm always very busy and reary take a breaks .
So I can study whenever I have time .
I and my wife are very friendly . .
I washed the dishes and made the beds the next day .
As far as I know , the zoo has by far the most variety of wild animals in our country .
I 'm Leonado and I 'm  Engineer .
The baby looks like her father .
Let me tell you what I did ...
I 'm happy to assist you on this issue .
His body is long and narrow , and rectangular .
Why do n't you buy a purple top .
You must think about  team when you do everything in the company .
It is really a great deal .
Do you agree with me ?
My wife live in Rio de Janeiro with me .
She is a bit shy but has a beautiful smile .
You start to prepare the dinner at 18 ` clock .
Of course , you have to travel on the subway each day .
Do not forget , it is hard to find a job , there are many competitions and sometimes it is not fair when you start working in a new job .
We can talk about our histories and spend good times together .
As you know , since the source of the problem is not the work 's relationships , we respect the privacy of our employees and try to manage it with the help of our psychologists and advisers .
You ask me can I surf ?
I can drive , sing and dance .
I 'm sleeping in camping into a festival .
I think home remadis is also ok .
On Monday , I did the ironing .
Hi  i give some recomendations for who wants to work in a great company like John Tiles Ltd ,  is an industry manufacturing who have a great oportunity in regional marketing manager   is located in manchester and the duties is of design adverts , manage projects ,  work with sales  to build  client base .
Can people work as a salesman if they are overweight ?
Jane would like to see you on her birthday party .
South Africa 's Bonnie has programmed a 2 feet tall service robot to giving a hand by picking up trash and helping with onsite security in hospitals .
In my birthday , I hope I can spend with you and my son , we will have a good time .
However , the main point of  song is negative .
Fabio will buy some dance CDs .
can you buy me a bag of rice , some vegetables , some fruit , a bottle of orange juice and some meat .
Women can wear skirts as well as nice blouses with pressed trousers or dresses , but clothing should be well-fitting and skirts and dresses should n't be too short .
When I started this course three months ago I was trying to build a strong strategy for improving my vocabulary and grammar .
I really think you  from Colorado News , should publish such  terrifying story in order to lead people to reflect about it .
Maby I go home at night .
The orange skirt is nice .
I hope I can count on you for support because with your help I know we can make a difference !
An experienced doctor will help you to overcome this phobia or at least  symptoms may be lessened .
That shows that the second group has more potential than the first one .
On the other hand , the international sales increased gradually in 2004 reaching more than 2 millions .
He was more educated then her rich boyfriend .
I think that I am titled to receive the money back , which He refuses to give me .
The meat was very awful .
It has wood cabinets and all appliances .
She lives in the coutry-side with my parents .
We are live in Rostov , Russia .
Helen  bringing water and wine .
the haedquater  our firm is in Berlin .
But before you run out to buy one , think about the price .
I rarely have a meetings .
The singer put in music his past longing when your city was a farm .
I 'm very proud of you .
in fact , it was a horrible , shabby little boat .
First , we are desperatedly in need of blood , so please give blood in the hospital .
Give each player a frisbee .
Have you ever had take time off for maternity status and than a disadvantage about that ?
I started working for a hospital in July 2006 .
So it became well-known , worldwide .
Visual aids such as graphs , bar charts , pie charts , line graph and flow charts are an important and effective way of structuring and communicating presentations that include a lot of statistics .
Not only they are learning to extinguish fire but also they are able to take care for a trembling and loving heart .
In the middle of the room is a great table with four chairs .
Moreover , your mum would be very upset if you give up your studies .
Lonely , monumental and cold , as a single rock in the middle of the plain , stood the large luxurious house in Shiny Avenue .
To treat addicts in  musica industry ?
The winner is the player with the most points .
I ´ m looking forward to hear from you .
Thanks in advance for the answers .
Three years relevant experience  preferred .
house ca not be demolished .
With the $ 380 I put into a savings account the total amount of $ 1180 could be used for the pay back off the loan .
I work very long  in the day , but I alwaays make a break for lunch at the forces for the rest of the day to refuel .
If you knock down a pin , you scored one point .
My brother 's names are Roberto and Arthur , they have thirty-five and thirty-two .
My favorite day is sunday .
Therefore , can I force them to fix the house ?
The guide book contains the important information on use , therefore  attentively introduce  with it .
The fourth stage of my plan is , I 'm going to make a job application .
You may even hear birds singing around your window .
I live in Sao Paulo .
Then we take 10 plastic bottles filled with water and use it as out bowling pins .
This will be absolutely amazing .
It could n't be a better place for a family .
My birthday is on the 11th .
The winner is who with the most points .
It is winter now and people have a sore throat very often .
Near the house is a beautiful park .
We have three children , Tim , Lucy and Jennifer .
This means I have some experience in this field .
Firstly , I 'm going to talk about the succesfull strategic of development products .
You must be very tidy .
Filled a little water in the bottles .
I think soap operas is a discussing program .
There are 20 desks and 14 chairs .
I know you 're an adventurous and daring person .
My name is Katharina and I 'm running for student council president ,
You will not have any regrets !
I hope you 're doing well this week .
Also , there are 12 desks and 14 chairs .
I assure you that it will never happen again .
This is a spacious apartment with parking , perfect for a single person or young couple .
There is a yellow woman inside the painting with a square face , a narrow rectangular body , holding her arms towards the sky .
After finally I called the policeman .
Therefore I refused to stay there .
The robber broke down the door .
We eat  chafing dish and go shopping .
I need to take my umbrella .
Service robotics with relation to the escort robot is the field Hiro Takashi deals with .
It 's also part of the permanent collection and it 's expected to be a well visited exhibition .
3 . The cabin was dirty ; beds were uncomfortable ; bathrooms were dirty and disgusting 
Third , someone mention that you are untidy .
You may know that almost 90 % of the employers work at home .
I could n't believe my eyes when I saw how much they were asking for .
Some times when I was talking to my colleague I found their expression is very confused .
If you follow these rules , you , as I said , will save money and improve your life 's quality .
If we have enough players we can play soccar .
Your travel brochure said that everything was included in the package .
But if  scored a strike , then the player will take two more shoot .
The answer is to spice something .
It is more cheap than any industrialized antibioc , and best for our health .
But it 's better than nothing .
You have  improve your time management , I advise you to visit some time management trainings if you ca n't do it by yourself .
Tomorrow the weather is going to be very hot and sunny .
I have long blonde hair and big blue eyes .
I clean the house and sweep the floor two times a week .
The kitchen offers modern stainless steel appliances , granite countertops and a hand-painted backsplash .
He has short black hair and grey eyes .
Why do many big businesses have a gender and leadership problem ?
Do you consider yourself to be prejudiced ?
I like playing tennis , swimming and doing yoga .
It is with great pleasure to inform you as our shareholders and clients of a change to  company 's logo .
So I think my economic condition can afford the mortgage of the flat .
But all of them now are in the past .
My favorite day is Sunday .
House size is 111.78 square meters .
And we have still lost more and more market share in the last 2 years in the international market .
you can play tennis on the beach .
Most people are not interested in buying winter hats in the summer .
I 'm so sorry that I missed your wedding , but I had a bad cold .
Nowadays the most popular drink is Absinth .
I dreamed one day I won a million dollars , I quit my job and travel around the world .
I do n't want to work anymore .
See you soon , Tiago Santana .
In the future , if our company would like to expand young men market , we should invest more on the magines supported by extensive website content .
What is the main focus in the sphere of selling ?
Why  the women need to suffer too discrination yet if they are able for a job as the men as are ?
My wife  thirty-five , my son thirteen , my first daughter four and second daughter nine .
I want to inform you that we want to continue our work .
Feed the fish on Monday , Wednesday and Friday afternoon .
But it was imposible .
Hope you have a nice weekend too .
You 'll never found any other place like this .
The ticket you can buy in advance so  will be quieter .
I live in Moscow with my family .
Give a frisbee to each player and take two shots on each turn .
It could have been a hoax that it can ward off the evil spirits .
At night I have a other shower , I and my wife , we watch Tv and at 11 we go to bed .
Moreover , it would be amazing  get to known prestigious authors .
It seems that she has messed up her life , that is boring .
The bathrooms are bright and airy , with chrome fixtures .
It will be so much easier than getting up at 7 a.m. every morning , commuting hours to work and sitting in a boring old office .
I think that is an attractive point .
Sometimes I ´ m very tired in the evening , because it ´ s very difficult to look the whole day on the monitor .
I ca n't encourage you more to apply for this job because it is by for the most amazing job I can find for you .
The name of my nativ city is Quedlinburg .
This is by far the best job I could find for you .
The walls are green and  curtains are white .
Here are  few things that you should remember about the Canadian culture before coming .
If you really want to go  a restaurant , you should go to cheaper restaurants .
My mother and father are hardworking , patient and clever .
We have different sizes and colors of pens .
Maybe we have diffierent result .
Of course I need to work during this time for survive .
I need  talk to  phone all day  I always have meeting and somentimes I travel to other plant .
I started elementary school in 1983 when I was 7 years old and I learned  go bike when I was 8 years old .
Player with the most points is the winner .
I 'd like to invite you to my party .
The purple top is cheap and nice .
I would really appreciate  if you could share your oppinion about my choice .
I always serve food and drink .
We 're bringing some chicken sandwiches and for think , some water and wine .
For example  the work climate or the intercourse between you and your colleagues ?
When there is direct discrimination ?
My husband would be attentive and tender ,  do everything to make our family happy .
At night , I play computer games .
And from a company side , you will learn how to handle emergent case timely and right .
Give food to the fishes every two days .
you 'll have the opportunity to be closer  them and feeding them , what is wonderful .
Anyway ,  whatever who will live with you .
New company will be a trade of spare parts company .
Granny sets the table at 6pm .
And our goal is to win the first place in  ` Sozvezdie ' Festival this spring .
I want to play with my daughter , teach her .
I sometimes go to shopping .
to start with i was offered a special dish .
How can we deal with the harassment issue ?
In winter we go to the cinema and go to the shopping .
Because I have been a socialist for five years , I got the survey between the poor person and the rich men .
But I ca n't do this work because I did n't understand what was being asked to do .
I will fight for your right of a free evening on every day of the week .
Women ca n't wear jeans , mini skirt and T-shirt .
Besides , you 'll have regular trips to observe wild crocodiles .
We recommend this winning artwork for all  upper 13 years old .
However , she is willing to meet these demands if the perfect property is found for her family .
There are already 6 competitive products .
Annually , we will come to visit her and give her a memorable birthday .
Even if it 's just a gossip we can bet that had something wrong tho start those comments .
In summer the weather is hot and sunny .
I encourage you to continue your support in respect of my presidency .
I find my english is very bad .
In the following review two websites www.nileretail.com -LRB- Abbr . No 1 -RRB- and www.the-shopping-space.com -LRB- Abbr . No 2 -RRB- , will be compared with .
They are live in Liaoning .
I always have good food , drink and a place to rest my body after a hard working day .
He is eighty-one years old .
And what will happen to our jobs and to our future generations ?
Then the progress came and they loose their home .
After the highschool I studdied mathematic .
He likes the things cheap and you can buy books , flowers or chocolates with their $ 10 .
There is a shower and closet .
Then go along Liverpool Rd. , turn left at Green Ave.
First of all , the members of our family usually have long walks in the country .
My sons are wearing both a brown shirt and green pants .
It is a great pleasure for us from blue sky that we can inform our shareholders and clients of a change to the companie 's logo .
I have a nice cat .
My teas are also recommended for chilren and pregnant women .
There are the 13 teachers and the heardteacher .
I always have meetings but I never go on business trips .
Can we reschedule another time ?
He has short brown hair , and brown eyes .
I had a ice-cream which was too sweet .
I think I 'll be better in a few days .
I love dancing and listening to music so we could make a fun party with great music and dance gypsy  preference .
I believe I will be  remarkable asset to your company .
The graph provides sales figures for international sales and national sales from 2004 to  mid of 2008 of Best Books Company .
They are useful to find out more about options for future work .
The job duties include manager people , handle conflict and also work hard all day to be better than other companies on our field .
Sometimes I clean the desk and mop the floor .
Cubism actually prepared the way for abstract art .
So I steped down  it 4 months ago .
Thank you for the e-mail .
We play soccer and ran on the beach to warm up .
My doctor said I should n't go out and meet people .
On of the walls  painted with huge roses .
My father is fairly fat ,  has short , brown hair and big blue eyes .
I will do a volunteer work and get new experiences on my vacations .
Thirdly , you have to get better at time management and you have to be on time for meetings .
I usually go home late .
My name is Norbert Juergens and I am your candidate for the council president .
My house is opposite the park and between the supermarket and restaurant .
Granny does the laundry every Tuesday afternoon .
I am looking forward for your feedback anytime soon .
Experienced watch buyers will settle for nothing less than the highest standards in luxury craftsmanship from the world 's most desirable brands .
What does it apply to ?
I have a long and brown hair .
I sit at the desk all day .
Also I want to study online for the joy of learning .
In winter it 's cold and sometimes sunny .
The body language in Russia is very similar with  American one .
I go to the supermarket at ten o’clock .
This is probably the most suitable job that I 've found for you .
There I got a proper training in such subjects as English , literature and world culture .
